Schools in Nepal are always busy; many of them are even chaotic. There are students busy catching up with the syllabus of different subjects and teachers preparing for the classes, checking the papers and results. Talk to the people involved in school management, most of them tell you why the country’s school management system needs a revolution.There are over 30,000 schools in Nepal, and the majority of them are still undertaking the process manually. Students have to write long papers and teachers either take the copies home or stay back at school burning the midnight oil. Then, working parents, in particular, have a hard time checking their wards’ progress. Perhaps the sector awaits a digital revolution. Realising this, a team of young entrepreneurs have introduced Veda to many schools across the country.Now, with Veda, students and teachers save their time staying updated with the syllabus and grading the exams whereas parents have an easier way to stay updated with their children’s progress. Veda has mentored and guided more than 900 schools in Nepal, solving their basic and managerial system. Veda is a school management software application designed specifically for schools by Ingrails, a software company. The flagship app is the team’s attempt to digitise the entire education system and improve the knowledge-sharing process among teachers and students in Nepal. Veda is the brainchild of three young entrepreneurs who co-founded Ingrails: Nirdesh Dwa, Sujit Pathak and Sanjan Piya.Chief Executive Officer Dwa explains, “Veda includes customisable features like monitoring and managing visitor records, enrolment processes, staff management, archiving, inventory, homework and classwork management and checking, results, record keeping of students (attendance, health, merits, progress), billing and financing management, and library systems.”Additionally, schools can keep and manage records as well as other carry out evaluations of disciplinary and performance reports, similar to those used by the Ivy League, for all levels from class 1 to 10. “One can also look at the progress report of a child as they graduate the classes in one platform.”“The platform has been built with a mix of ERP (enterprise resource planning) systems and MIS (management information system). Any piece of information can be easily disseminated among the users within the system easing the communication among the school administration, teachers, students, and even parents,” he adds.Available in both web and mobile-based versions, Veda is more useful in desktop versions, but communication and tracking progress with mobile has been arguably the best feature of the app. “We realised that there was a communication gap between the school and the teachers, and our platform has abridged it significantly. They went from spending a lot of time and money on sending notices and updates through letters to digitising the whole process,” says Managing Director Pathak.According to Dwa, the app was not the same in the beginning. “We started as an offshore company, and we had been working with clients abroad. We knew each other and wanted to build our own company. But only after working in the sector for a while, we started noticing that there were gaps in the market in all sectors. Then, we decided to focus on education.”There were a few apps that some schools were using, but Nepali edtech companies had limited themselves to making accounting software. “So there were other many gaps in the system that we could address, starting with digitising of the manual management system and records. We first conducted thorough research on the history and current trends of the education industry.”Chief Operating Officer Sanjan Piya explains, “The Veda version we have today has evolved through many updates and research as well as our learning and failures. By understanding the needs of the schools, and addressing their individual needs, we can modify the platform and I believe, schools can basically all services that an institution might need.”While many platforms have focused on accounting software, attendance and billing, Veda also brought staff management systems, along with teacher evaluation and performance of administration, in an attempt to multiply the output. “They are able to trace the project and make more data-driven decisions.”Meanwhile, during the Covid pandemic, the Veda team helped the schools navigate through the new normal of online learning, making the whole process more seamless.But the developers want to clarify that they do not want to replace the teachers, staff, students or parents or their roles but only aim to empower them and automate their work. And all this makes Veda better than its competitors, claim the co-founders. Even though people do not know about Veda by name, they claim, people have used and appreciated the app in one way or the other.To achieve long-term satisfaction and loyalty from their users, the team says it has always prioritised giving technical support to the clients, with continuous feedback and adjustments. “Our biggest team is the technical support team so that clients can perform more smoothly,” says Dwa.But it took the team quite a while to understand and expand to this level. Pathak shares, “We started with only a handful of people at St Xavier’s. First, it took us time to enter the gate and make the school understand. But we convinced them and started our journey. The wait for the first step was long, the very next day, we got some five other clients and we were working full time.”With the new roles, the team also took together the realisation that it had to develop the platform considering that there will be people who will not be so technologically adept. “This is why we kept the platform, its interface and the steps as simple as possible so that they will be easy to use for all. And we also made sure to train all the staffers on how to use the app,” shares Pathak.To cater to the diverse user groups, the app is available in both Nepali and English. And, all the updates come in one timeline form, similar to Facebook, so that staying updated for anyone is just a scroll away.“There was a problem at the beginning. But we had a team set in the field to cater to any queries or technical problems,” he adds, saying that now the team now knows and is prepared for the needs of the clients and the problems that might arise.The team says the pandemic experience also helped it cope with the resistance from parents who were not familiar with the technology. “Also, many parents are in their 30s now, and they are technologically sound, so the particular problem is decreasing,” adds Piya.The co-founders of Veda were one of the few early young entrepreneurs that Nepal saw as Veda started in May 2016. Now with all the experience and work, it has gained the trust and tied with more than 900 big and small, public and private schools in Kathmandu, Mustang, Chitwan, Janakpur, Nepalgunjg and Butwal among others, with more than 1.6 million users. “As a part of our corporate social responsibility, we have also tied up with 70-80 government schools,” adds Piya.Veda has made its presence known outside the country too by working with schools from Brunei and Japan. “We had plans to expand, but even before we executed them, the foreign schools approached us online, knowing about our product. And we feel validated to get the clients who sought us,” Dwa says. “The schools that work with us always give our referrals, since the start, so we are growing and happy about it.” Validation also comes from the many awards it has bagged so far.  “We are ISO-certified and IRD-listed. We have also received the National ICT award, and the Microsoft award, and last year got listed in Forbes 30 and 30 Asia. And we are looking forward to more.”“Apart from us, the schools using Veda that win awards and perform well across the country also acknowledge our platform and give us credit for their success. That makes us happier than our own accolades,” adds Pathak.With Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal expanding his Council of Ministers for the tenth time recently, the leadership of the Ministry of Women, Children and Senior Citizens has changed again. Succeeding Nepal Samajbadi Party leader Mahindra Raya Yadav, Nepali Congress leader Surendra Raj Acharya was appointed as the new minister.Yadav took charge of this ministry on March 31. But just after 33 days, he was transferred to the Ministry of Water Supply.Acharya is the fifth person to lead this ministry in the current government. A day after being sworn in, starting December 26, 2022, PM himself took over the leadership of this ministry. He held the position for 23 days. And, on January 17, CPN-UML’s Bhagawati Chaudhary got the responsibility. But when the UML left the government on February 27, Dahal took over this ministry again, making him the third change in the leadership. After him, Yadav and now Acharya took over the leadership. Five leadership changes in seven expansions of the cabinet, in such a short time, have only weakened the Ministry of Women. National Assembly member Kamala Pant says it is not good for a man to be a minister for the portfolio. She says, “Ministries that work for vulnerable groups such as women, children and senior citizens have not been given priority. They also get less budget. It has become a complimentary title, a way to satisfy all.”But this is not just about now, the ministry has been unstable for about three decades now, which experts believe is evidence of why the state bodies have failed to promote women’s leadership in Nepal. This Ministry of Women was formed in 1995 when Sher Bahadur Deuba was the prime minister. Congress leader Pant says, “It was formed with the aim of advocating and strengthening the presence of women in government bodies, but it could not perform as intended.”The facts also support Pant’s statement. According to the statistics of the Ministry of Women, Children and Senior Citizens, when there are 70 ministers in total, the prime ministers have led this ministry 15 times. PM Dahal has led the ministry four times while other former prime ministers including Deuba headed the ministry four times, Girija Prasad Koirala three times, Surya Bahadur Thapa twice and Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Madhav Kumar Nepal and Baburam Bhattarai have led this ministry once each.Prime ministers leading any ministry indicate a delay in delegating portfolios during cabinet expansions. Lack of delegation makes the prime minister the de facto leader of any empty portfolio(s).If one looks at the 28 years of the ministry’s history, the number of ministers (including 51 ministers, 14 state ministers and five assistant ministers) has reached 70. That means one minister assumed office for five months on average.Another look at the data says that out of the 49 ministers at the Ministry of Women so far, only 13 were women. They were Lila Koirala, Sahana Pradhan, Ashtalakshmi Shakya, Durga Shrestha, Jaipuri Gharti Magar, Riddhi Baba Pradhan, Neelam KC, Asha Koirala, Tham Maya Thapa Magar, Juli Kumari Mahato, Chanda Chaudhary, Uma Regmi and Bhagawati Chaudhary, The rest of the ministers were men. Women, however, are in the majority as state ministers. So far, 11 of the 14 state ministers have been women. In total, there have been 24 women leaders as ministers, state and assistant ministers. This is 35 per cent of the total number of ministers at the Ministry of Women. The number of women ministers in the current cabinet is also low. The 23-member Council of Ministers includes Rekha Sharma (Communications and Information Technology), Ranjita Shrestha (Land Management, Cooperatives and Poverty Alleviation) and Sita Gurung (Urban Development), Sushila Sripaili Thakuri (Culture, Tourism and Civil Aviation/State minister) and Nanda Chapai (Physical Infrastructure and Transport/State minister). The three female ministers in this cabinet make up 13 per cent of the total ministers and add state ministers, it would be 20 per cent.Former minister Jaipuri Gharti Magar says that the fault behind the Ministry of Women’s poor presence and performance lies in the mindset of the leadership. “This ministry was supposed to be for women in leadership. But the ministry could not perform. And with no resources, means and power, it was bound to fail.”Magar adds, “It is not that only women should go to the Ministry of Women, but it is better for a woman to be in the leadership because they will work in the field of women.”“Men were being allotted in this ministry as well, which was meant for women’s leadership. But as their first choice was another ministry, many changed portfolios quicker,” adds Pant, the former state minister of this ministry.Male ministers of state for women, children and senior citizens: Sher Bahadur Deuba, Rameshwar Raya Yadav, Surya Bahadur Thapa, Girija Prasad Koirala, Kul Bahadur Gurung, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Chiranjibi Wagle, Rajendra Kharel, Gore Bahadur Khapangi, Khadga Bahadur Vishwakarma, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, Ram Charan Chaudhary, Madhav Kumar Nepal, Bijay Kumar Gachhadar, Sarva Dev Prasad Ojha, Baburam Bhattarai, Mahendra Prasad Yadav, Badri Prasad Neupane, CP Gajurel, Kumar Khadka, Bikram Bahadur Thapa, Parbat Gurung, Leelanath Shrestha, Mahindra Rai Yadav and Surendra Raj AcharyaMale state ministers: Ram Bachchan Ahir, Arvind Shah and Mohammad Zakir HussainMale assistant ministers: Duryodhan Singh Chaudhary, Naresh Bahadur Singh, Keshab Bahadur Chand and Golche SarkiThis story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Neocolonialism is a term used to describe the economic and political influence that developed countries exert over developing countries, often through indirect means such as international trade, foreign investment and international aid. Nepal, a small landlocked country located in the Himalayas, has been subject to neocolonialism although it has not been a colony politically.Consequently, it is making significant negative impacts on the Nepali economy and politics. So it is about time the country thought of the solutions.One of the most significant negative impacts of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy is the unequal distribution of resources and wealth. Developed countries often use their economic power to extract resources from developing countries at a low cost, leaving little for local populations. This has been the case in Nepal, where multinational corporations have been granted access to the country’s natural resources, such as timber and minerals, at a low cost. This has resulted in the depletion of natural resources, environmental degradation, and a loss of revenue for the Nepali government.Furthermore, neocolonialism has led to the exploitation of Nepali labour. Many multinational corporations have established factories in Nepal, taking advantage of cheap labour and relaxed labour laws. These corporations often pay low wages and provide poor working conditions, leading to the exploitation of workers. This has resulted in a decline in the standard of living for many Nepali citizens.In addition to the impacts on the Nepali economy, neocolonialism has also had a negative impact on Nepal’s political system. Developed countries often use their economic power to influence the political decisions of developing countries. In Nepal, this has resulted in a lack of political autonomy, with decisions often being made to appease foreign governments and corporations rather than to benefit the Nepali people. This has led to corruption, a lack of transparency and a weakening of democratic institutions.Moreover, the influence of foreign powers in Nepal’s political system has resulted in a lack of investment in key areas such as education, healthcare and infrastructure. Developed countries often prioritise investments that benefit their own economies, not the Nepali economy. This has resulted in a lack of investment in critical areas, leaving Nepal’s citizens without access to basic services.Neocolonialism can inflict significant trauma on the Nepali economy and politics. They have been explained below:So, to eradicate the effect of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics, Nepal should follow the following measures:• Diversifying the economy: Nepal’s economy heavily relies on agriculture, tourism, and remittances, making it vulnerable to the external shocks of neocolonialism. Diversifying the economy by investing in new industries, such as technology and manufacturing, could reduce the country’s dependence on these sectors and strengthen its economic independence.• Promoting fair trade: Nepal could work to promote fair trade practices that prioritise the needs of local businesses and communities over foreign corporations. This could involve developing policies that protect local producers and workers from exploitation and support the growth of domestic industries and the Nepali economy, overall.• Investing in education: Education is a powerful tool for reducing neocolonialism’s effects by empowering citizens with knowledge and skills to participate actively in their country’s economic and political systems. Nepal could invest in education by increasing access to schools, improving the quality of education, and supporting vocational training programmes that equip young people with relevant skills.• Strengthening political institutions: Strengthening democratic institutions is an essential step in reducing neocolonialism’s effects on Nepal’s politics. This could involve promoting transparency and accountability in government, increasing civic participation, and supporting the development of independent media that can hold the government accountable.• Building regional cooperation: Nepal could work to build stronger regional cooperation with neighbouring countries, such as India and China, to reduce its dependence on Western powers on the Nepali economy and politics and increase its bargaining power in international negotiations. This could involve collaborating on infrastructure projects, trade agreements, and cultural exchanges that promote mutual understanding and respect.Overall, reducing the effects of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics will require sustained efforts across multiple fronts. By diversifying the economy, promoting fair trade practices, investing in education, strengthening political institutions, and building regional cooperation, Nepal can take steps towards greater economic and political independence.Kathmandu, May 16Australian assistant minister for foreign affairs, Tim Watts, arrived in Kathmandu on Tuesday on a two-day visit.An official at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs says matters of mutual concerns and cooperation will be discussed during his engagements in Nepal today and tomorrow.Watts’ visit is aimed at handing over a tundal (a wooden artefact) stolen from the Ratneshwar temple of Nepal back to the government of Nepal. Stolen decades ago, the artefact was recovered at the Art Gallery of New South Wales. He will pay courtesy calls on Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal and Foreign Affairs Minister NP Saud. He will also visit Kathmandu University, Pashupatinath and Baudhanath areas, the ministry says.Kathmandu, May 16Ang Tawa Sherpa, a former Nepali Congress lawmaker, has surrendered himself to the police after facing an arrest warrant over the fake Bhutanese refugee scam.Earlier, an arrest warrant was issued against him after an arrestee named Sherpa as one of the people involved in the high-profile scam.Following that, Sherpa went to the Kathmandu District Police Range on Monday, according to an official.In connection with the same case, influential Nepali Congress leader Bal Krishna Khand is in custody whereas CPN-UML secretary Top Bahadur Rayamajhi has also been arrested.With Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal expanding his Council of Ministers for the tenth time recently, the leadership of the Ministry of Women, Children and Senior Citizens has changed again. Succeeding Nepal Samajbadi Party leader Mahindra Raya Yadav, Nepali Congress leader Surendra Raj Acharya was appointed as the new minister.Yadav took charge of this ministry on March 31. But just after 33 days, he was transferred to the Ministry of Water Supply.Acharya is the fifth person to lead this ministry in the current government. A day after being sworn in, starting December 26, 2022, PM himself took over the leadership of this ministry. He held the position for 23 days. And, on January 17, CPN-UML’s Bhagawati Chaudhary got the responsibility. But when the UML left the government on February 27, Dahal took over this ministry again, making him the third change in the leadership. After him, Yadav and now Acharya took over the leadership. Five leadership changes in seven expansions of the cabinet, in such a short time, have only weakened the Ministry of Women. National Assembly member Kamala Pant says it is not good for a man to be a minister for the portfolio. She says, “Ministries that work for vulnerable groups such as women, children and senior citizens have not been given priority. They also get less budget. It has become a complimentary title, a way to satisfy all.”But this is not just about now, the ministry has been unstable for about three decades now, which experts believe is evidence of why the state bodies have failed to promote women’s leadership in Nepal. This Ministry of Women was formed in 1995 when Sher Bahadur Deuba was the prime minister. Congress leader Pant says, “It was formed with the aim of advocating and strengthening the presence of women in government bodies, but it could not perform as intended.”The facts also support Pant’s statement. According to the statistics of the Ministry of Women, Children and Senior Citizens, when there are 70 ministers in total, the prime ministers have led this ministry 15 times. PM Dahal has led the ministry four times while other former prime ministers including Deuba headed the ministry four times, Girija Prasad Koirala three times, Surya Bahadur Thapa twice and Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Madhav Kumar Nepal and Baburam Bhattarai have led this ministry once each.Prime ministers leading any ministry indicate a delay in delegating portfolios during cabinet expansions. Lack of delegation makes the prime minister the de facto leader of any empty portfolio(s).If one looks at the 28 years of the ministry’s history, the number of ministers (including 51 ministers, 14 state ministers and five assistant ministers) has reached 70. That means one minister assumed office for five months on average.Another look at the data says that out of the 49 ministers at the Ministry of Women so far, only 13 were women. They were Lila Koirala, Sahana Pradhan, Ashtalakshmi Shakya, Durga Shrestha, Jaipuri Gharti Magar, Riddhi Baba Pradhan, Neelam KC, Asha Koirala, Tham Maya Thapa Magar, Juli Kumari Mahato, Chanda Chaudhary, Uma Regmi and Bhagawati Chaudhary, The rest of the ministers were men. Women, however, are in the majority as state ministers. So far, 11 of the 14 state ministers have been women. In total, there have been 24 women leaders as ministers, state and assistant ministers. This is 35 per cent of the total number of ministers at the Ministry of Women. The number of women ministers in the current cabinet is also low. The 23-member Council of Ministers includes Rekha Sharma (Communications and Information Technology), Ranjita Shrestha (Land Management, Cooperatives and Poverty Alleviation) and Sita Gurung (Urban Development), Sushila Sripaili Thakuri (Culture, Tourism and Civil Aviation/State minister) and Nanda Chapai (Physical Infrastructure and Transport/State minister). The three female ministers in this cabinet make up 13 per cent of the total ministers and add state ministers, it would be 20 per cent.Former minister Jaipuri Gharti Magar says that the fault behind the Ministry of Women’s poor presence and performance lies in the mindset of the leadership. “This ministry was supposed to be for women in leadership. But the ministry could not perform. And with no resources, means and power, it was bound to fail.”Magar adds, “It is not that only women should go to the Ministry of Women, but it is better for a woman to be in the leadership because they will work in the field of women.”“Men were being allotted in this ministry as well, which was meant for women’s leadership. But as their first choice was another ministry, many changed portfolios quicker,” adds Pant, the former state minister of this ministry.Male ministers of state for women, children and senior citizens: Sher Bahadur Deuba, Rameshwar Raya Yadav, Surya Bahadur Thapa, Girija Prasad Koirala, Kul Bahadur Gurung, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Chiranjibi Wagle, Rajendra Kharel, Gore Bahadur Khapangi, Khadga Bahadur Vishwakarma, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, Ram Charan Chaudhary, Madhav Kumar Nepal, Bijay Kumar Gachhadar, Sarva Dev Prasad Ojha, Baburam Bhattarai, Mahendra Prasad Yadav, Badri Prasad Neupane, CP Gajurel, Kumar Khadka, Bikram Bahadur Thapa, Parbat Gurung, Leelanath Shrestha, Mahindra Rai Yadav and Surendra Raj AcharyaMale state ministers: Ram Bachchan Ahir, Arvind Shah and Mohammad Zakir HussainMale assistant ministers: Duryodhan Singh Chaudhary, Naresh Bahadur Singh, Keshab Bahadur Chand and Golche SarkiThis story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Neocolonialism is a term used to describe the economic and political influence that developed countries exert over developing countries, often through indirect means such as international trade, foreign investment and international aid. Nepal, a small landlocked country located in the Himalayas, has been subject to neocolonialism although it has not been a colony politically.Consequently, it is making significant negative impacts on the Nepali economy and politics. So it is about time the country thought of the solutions.One of the most significant negative impacts of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy is the unequal distribution of resources and wealth. Developed countries often use their economic power to extract resources from developing countries at a low cost, leaving little for local populations. This has been the case in Nepal, where multinational corporations have been granted access to the country’s natural resources, such as timber and minerals, at a low cost. This has resulted in the depletion of natural resources, environmental degradation, and a loss of revenue for the Nepali government.Furthermore, neocolonialism has led to the exploitation of Nepali labour. Many multinational corporations have established factories in Nepal, taking advantage of cheap labour and relaxed labour laws. These corporations often pay low wages and provide poor working conditions, leading to the exploitation of workers. This has resulted in a decline in the standard of living for many Nepali citizens.In addition to the impacts on the Nepali economy, neocolonialism has also had a negative impact on Nepal’s political system. Developed countries often use their economic power to influence the political decisions of developing countries. In Nepal, this has resulted in a lack of political autonomy, with decisions often being made to appease foreign governments and corporations rather than to benefit the Nepali people. This has led to corruption, a lack of transparency and a weakening of democratic institutions.Moreover, the influence of foreign powers in Nepal’s political system has resulted in a lack of investment in key areas such as education, healthcare and infrastructure. Developed countries often prioritise investments that benefit their own economies, not the Nepali economy. This has resulted in a lack of investment in critical areas, leaving Nepal’s citizens without access to basic services.Neocolonialism can inflict significant trauma on the Nepali economy and politics. They have been explained below:So, to eradicate the effect of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics, Nepal should follow the following measures:• Diversifying the economy: Nepal’s economy heavily relies on agriculture, tourism, and remittances, making it vulnerable to the external shocks of neocolonialism. Diversifying the economy by investing in new industries, such as technology and manufacturing, could reduce the country’s dependence on these sectors and strengthen its economic independence.• Promoting fair trade: Nepal could work to promote fair trade practices that prioritise the needs of local businesses and communities over foreign corporations. This could involve developing policies that protect local producers and workers from exploitation and support the growth of domestic industries and the Nepali economy, overall.• Investing in education: Education is a powerful tool for reducing neocolonialism’s effects by empowering citizens with knowledge and skills to participate actively in their country’s economic and political systems. Nepal could invest in education by increasing access to schools, improving the quality of education, and supporting vocational training programmes that equip young people with relevant skills.• Strengthening political institutions: Strengthening democratic institutions is an essential step in reducing neocolonialism’s effects on Nepal’s politics. This could involve promoting transparency and accountability in government, increasing civic participation, and supporting the development of independent media that can hold the government accountable.• Building regional cooperation: Nepal could work to build stronger regional cooperation with neighbouring countries, such as India and China, to reduce its dependence on Western powers on the Nepali economy and politics and increase its bargaining power in international negotiations. This could involve collaborating on infrastructure projects, trade agreements, and cultural exchanges that promote mutual understanding and respect.Overall, reducing the effects of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics will require sustained efforts across multiple fronts. By diversifying the economy, promoting fair trade practices, investing in education, strengthening political institutions, and building regional cooperation, Nepal can take steps towards greater economic and political independence.Kathmandu, May 15Police in Kathmandu have arrested the CPN-UML’s suspended secretary and lawmaker Top Bahadur Rayamajhi over the recently surfaced fake Bhutanese refugee scam.A senior official says the special bureau under the Nepal Police headquarters arrested him in the Budhanilakantha area of northern Kathmandu.The arrest has been possible 11 days after the police received a warrant to arrest the former deputy prime minister and his son, Sandeep. Sandeep was arrested in Butwal on the same day, but Top Bahadur managed to run away.Sources say he came to Kathmandu just on Saturday.For his alleged involvement in the same case, Bal Krishna Khand, another former minister and a powerful leader of the ruling coalition party Nepali Congress, is already arrested. Kathmandu, May 16Launched in the initiative of the Confederation of Nepalese Industries, another edition of the Make in Nepal Summit was held today at Hotel Yak & Yeti, Kathmandu on Tuesday. As a part of the Make In Nepal Abhiyan (campaign), the event was held in a bid to boost its economy and create sustainable growth, Various speakers who addressed the event highlighted how Nepal has embarked on an ambitious journey to better its economy. Industry and Commerce Minister Ramesh Rijal in his address highlighted the need for holistic growth of the industry sector and the government’s role in the process.Also addressing the event, economist and lawmaker Swarnim Wagle said there is a need for the country to better its manufacturing sector, and move beyond mere assembling and distribution. He emphasised the need for resources, skilled workers, technologies, and policies. He also drew attention to the urgent need for resources and policy changes that address the challenges posed by an ageing population, and the need to work on the inevitable problems it will pose to the economy.Other speakers and panellists also spoke on how creating an ecosystem that supports and encourages youth and women entrepreneurs is important while fostering inclusivity and economic empowerment. Speakers talked about the significance of developing diplomatic and economic relationships with neighbouring countries such as India and China and easing the trade for those who want to work in Nepal. As Nepal eagerly awaits the budget announcement this month, experts and speakers also highlighted the need to revise policies for better economic projections and predictions.Apart from the keynote speeches, the ‘Make in Nepal’ event held four plenary sessions on building industrial ecosystems, industrial infrastructures, the potential of natural resources, and effective budget implementation.Biratnagar, May 16You have seen a lot of dead people returning to life. What do you do if this happens in real life?Recently, a young man in the Jhapa district of eastern Nepal surprised everyone in his family and community as he returned home one day after the family completed nearly two-week-long death rites following the ritual. Suraj Karki (29), a resident of Goldhap, Haldibari rural municipality-1 of the district, had been residing at Kotihom, a religious institution providing refuge to sanyasis and the homeless, in Kankai municipality-4 of the district.On April 25, the police found a man dead in the Kankai area. Although the deceased could not be identified, someone told the police that he was a Karki.Helpless to identify the body and hand it over to the family, the police disseminated the reported information, which brought Suraj Karki’s sister to Kotihom.The sister identified the body as her brother’s and everyone believed her. The family performed the funeral and subsequent rituals at Kotihom itself. The rituals were over on May 9, but Suraj Karki reached his home on May 10.It means the mystery is not solved yet and the Jhapa police are investigating who died on April 25.Kathmandu, May 16Australian assistant minister for foreign affairs, Tim Watts, arrived in Kathmandu on Tuesday on a two-day visit.An official at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs says matters of mutual concerns and cooperation will be discussed during his engagements in Nepal today and tomorrow.Watts’ visit is aimed at handing over a tundal (a wooden artefact) stolen from the Ratneshwar temple of Nepal back to the government of Nepal. Stolen decades ago, the artefact was recovered at the Art Gallery of New South Wales. He will pay courtesy calls on Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal and Foreign Affairs Minister NP Saud. He will also visit Kathmandu University, Pashupatinath and Baudhanath areas, the ministry says.Schools in Nepal are always busy; many of them are even chaotic. There are students busy catching up with the syllabus of different subjects and teachers preparing for the classes, checking the papers and results. Talk to the people involved in school management, most of them tell you why the country’s school management system needs a revolution.There are over 30,000 schools in Nepal, and the majority of them are still undertaking the process manually. Students have to write long papers and teachers either take the copies home or stay back at school burning the midnight oil. Then, working parents, in particular, have a hard time checking their wards’ progress. Perhaps the sector awaits a digital revolution. Realising this, a team of young entrepreneurs have introduced Veda to many schools across the country.Now, with Veda, students and teachers save their time staying updated with the syllabus and grading the exams whereas parents have an easier way to stay updated with their children’s progress. Veda has mentored and guided more than 900 schools in Nepal, solving their basic and managerial system. Veda is a school management software application designed specifically for schools by Ingrails, a software company. The flagship app is the team’s attempt to digitise the entire education system and improve the knowledge-sharing process among teachers and students in Nepal. Veda is the brainchild of three young entrepreneurs who co-founded Ingrails: Nirdesh Dwa, Sujit Pathak and Sanjan Piya.Chief Executive Officer Dwa explains, “Veda includes customisable features like monitoring and managing visitor records, enrolment processes, staff management, archiving, inventory, homework and classwork management and checking, results, record keeping of students (attendance, health, merits, progress), billing and financing management, and library systems.”Additionally, schools can keep and manage records as well as other carry out evaluations of disciplinary and performance reports, similar to those used by the Ivy League, for all levels from class 1 to 10. “One can also look at the progress report of a child as they graduate the classes in one platform.”“The platform has been built with a mix of ERP (enterprise resource planning) systems and MIS (management information system). Any piece of information can be easily disseminated among the users within the system easing the communication among the school administration, teachers, students, and even parents,” he adds.Available in both web and mobile-based versions, Veda is more useful in desktop versions, but communication and tracking progress with mobile has been arguably the best feature of the app. “We realised that there was a communication gap between the school and the teachers, and our platform has abridged it significantly. They went from spending a lot of time and money on sending notices and updates through letters to digitising the whole process,” says Managing Director Pathak.According to Dwa, the app was not the same in the beginning. “We started as an offshore company, and we had been working with clients abroad. We knew each other and wanted to build our own company. But only after working in the sector for a while, we started noticing that there were gaps in the market in all sectors. Then, we decided to focus on education.”There were a few apps that some schools were using, but Nepali edtech companies had limited themselves to making accounting software. “So there were other many gaps in the system that we could address, starting with digitising of the manual management system and records. We first conducted thorough research on the history and current trends of the education industry.”Chief Operating Officer Sanjan Piya explains, “The Veda version we have today has evolved through many updates and research as well as our learning and failures. By understanding the needs of the schools, and addressing their individual needs, we can modify the platform and I believe, schools can basically all services that an institution might need.”While many platforms have focused on accounting software, attendance and billing, Veda also brought staff management systems, along with teacher evaluation and performance of administration, in an attempt to multiply the output. “They are able to trace the project and make more data-driven decisions.”Meanwhile, during the Covid pandemic, the Veda team helped the schools navigate through the new normal of online learning, making the whole process more seamless.But the developers want to clarify that they do not want to replace the teachers, staff, students or parents or their roles but only aim to empower them and automate their work. And all this makes Veda better than its competitors, claim the co-founders. Even though people do not know about Veda by name, they claim, people have used and appreciated the app in one way or the other.To achieve long-term satisfaction and loyalty from their users, the team says it has always prioritised giving technical support to the clients, with continuous feedback and adjustments. “Our biggest team is the technical support team so that clients can perform more smoothly,” says Dwa.But it took the team quite a while to understand and expand to this level. Pathak shares, “We started with only a handful of people at St Xavier’s. First, it took us time to enter the gate and make the school understand. But we convinced them and started our journey. The wait for the first step was long, the very next day, we got some five other clients and we were working full time.”With the new roles, the team also took together the realisation that it had to develop the platform considering that there will be people who will not be so technologically adept. “This is why we kept the platform, its interface and the steps as simple as possible so that they will be easy to use for all. And we also made sure to train all the staffers on how to use the app,” shares Pathak.To cater to the diverse user groups, the app is available in both Nepali and English. And, all the updates come in one timeline form, similar to Facebook, so that staying updated for anyone is just a scroll away.“There was a problem at the beginning. But we had a team set in the field to cater to any queries or technical problems,” he adds, saying that now the team now knows and is prepared for the needs of the clients and the problems that might arise.The team says the pandemic experience also helped it cope with the resistance from parents who were not familiar with the technology. “Also, many parents are in their 30s now, and they are technologically sound, so the particular problem is decreasing,” adds Piya.The co-founders of Veda were one of the few early young entrepreneurs that Nepal saw as Veda started in May 2016. Now with all the experience and work, it has gained the trust and tied with more than 900 big and small, public and private schools in Kathmandu, Mustang, Chitwan, Janakpur, Nepalgunjg and Butwal among others, with more than 1.6 million users. “As a part of our corporate social responsibility, we have also tied up with 70-80 government schools,” adds Piya.Veda has made its presence known outside the country too by working with schools from Brunei and Japan. “We had plans to expand, but even before we executed them, the foreign schools approached us online, knowing about our product. And we feel validated to get the clients who sought us,” Dwa says. “The schools that work with us always give our referrals, since the start, so we are growing and happy about it.” Validation also comes from the many awards it has bagged so far.  “We are ISO-certified and IRD-listed. We have also received the National ICT award, and the Microsoft award, and last year got listed in Forbes 30 and 30 Asia. And we are looking forward to more.”“Apart from us, the schools using Veda that win awards and perform well across the country also acknowledge our platform and give us credit for their success. That makes us happier than our own accolades,” adds Pathak.Kathmandu, May 16Ang Tawa Sherpa, a former Nepali Congress lawmaker, has surrendered himself to the police after facing an arrest warrant over the fake Bhutanese refugee scam.Earlier, an arrest warrant was issued against him after an arrestee named Sherpa as one of the people involved in the high-profile scam.Following that, Sherpa went to the Kathmandu District Police Range on Monday, according to an official.In connection with the same case, influential Nepali Congress leader Bal Krishna Khand is in custody whereas CPN-UML secretary Top Bahadur Rayamajhi has also been arrested.Biratnagar, May 16You have seen a lot of dead people returning to life. What do you do if this happens in real life?Recently, a young man in the Jhapa district of eastern Nepal surprised everyone in his family and community as he returned home one day after the family completed nearly two-week-long death rites following the ritual. Suraj Karki (29), a resident of Goldhap, Haldibari rural municipality-1 of the district, had been residing at Kotihom, a religious institution providing refuge to sanyasis and the homeless, in Kankai municipality-4 of the district.On April 25, the police found a man dead in the Kankai area. Although the deceased could not be identified, someone told the police that he was a Karki.Helpless to identify the body and hand it over to the family, the police disseminated the reported information, which brought Suraj Karki’s sister to Kotihom.The sister identified the body as her brother’s and everyone believed her. The family performed the funeral and subsequent rituals at Kotihom itself. The rituals were over on May 9, but Suraj Karki reached his home on May 10.It means the mystery is not solved yet and the Jhapa police are investigating who died on April 25.Schools in Nepal are always busy; many of them are even chaotic. There are students busy catching up with the syllabus of different subjects and teachers preparing for the classes, checking the papers and results. Talk to the people involved in school management, most of them tell you why the country’s school management system needs a revolution.There are over 30,000 schools in Nepal, and the majority of them are still undertaking the process manually. Students have to write long papers and teachers either take the copies home or stay back at school burning the midnight oil. Then, working parents, in particular, have a hard time checking their wards’ progress. Perhaps the sector awaits a digital revolution. Realising this, a team of young entrepreneurs have introduced Veda to many schools across the country.Now, with Veda, students and teachers save their time staying updated with the syllabus and grading the exams whereas parents have an easier way to stay updated with their children’s progress. Veda has mentored and guided more than 900 schools in Nepal, solving their basic and managerial system. Veda is a school management software application designed specifically for schools by Ingrails, a software company. The flagship app is the team’s attempt to digitise the entire education system and improve the knowledge-sharing process among teachers and students in Nepal. Veda is the brainchild of three young entrepreneurs who co-founded Ingrails: Nirdesh Dwa, Sujit Pathak and Sanjan Piya.Chief Executive Officer Dwa explains, “Veda includes customisable features like monitoring and managing visitor records, enrolment processes, staff management, archiving, inventory, homework and classwork management and checking, results, record keeping of students (attendance, health, merits, progress), billing and financing management, and library systems.”Additionally, schools can keep and manage records as well as other carry out evaluations of disciplinary and performance reports, similar to those used by the Ivy League, for all levels from class 1 to 10. “One can also look at the progress report of a child as they graduate the classes in one platform.”“The platform has been built with a mix of ERP (enterprise resource planning) systems and MIS (management information system). Any piece of information can be easily disseminated among the users within the system easing the communication among the school administration, teachers, students, and even parents,” he adds.Available in both web and mobile-based versions, Veda is more useful in desktop versions, but communication and tracking progress with mobile has been arguably the best feature of the app. “We realised that there was a communication gap between the school and the teachers, and our platform has abridged it significantly. They went from spending a lot of time and money on sending notices and updates through letters to digitising the whole process,” says Managing Director Pathak.According to Dwa, the app was not the same in the beginning. “We started as an offshore company, and we had been working with clients abroad. We knew each other and wanted to build our own company. But only after working in the sector for a while, we started noticing that there were gaps in the market in all sectors. Then, we decided to focus on education.”There were a few apps that some schools were using, but Nepali edtech companies had limited themselves to making accounting software. “So there were other many gaps in the system that we could address, starting with digitising of the manual management system and records. We first conducted thorough research on the history and current trends of the education industry.”Chief Operating Officer Sanjan Piya explains, “The Veda version we have today has evolved through many updates and research as well as our learning and failures. By understanding the needs of the schools, and addressing their individual needs, we can modify the platform and I believe, schools can basically all services that an institution might need.”While many platforms have focused on accounting software, attendance and billing, Veda also brought staff management systems, along with teacher evaluation and performance of administration, in an attempt to multiply the output. “They are able to trace the project and make more data-driven decisions.”Meanwhile, during the Covid pandemic, the Veda team helped the schools navigate through the new normal of online learning, making the whole process more seamless.But the developers want to clarify that they do not want to replace the teachers, staff, students or parents or their roles but only aim to empower them and automate their work. And all this makes Veda better than its competitors, claim the co-founders. Even though people do not know about Veda by name, they claim, people have used and appreciated the app in one way or the other.To achieve long-term satisfaction and loyalty from their users, the team says it has always prioritised giving technical support to the clients, with continuous feedback and adjustments. “Our biggest team is the technical support team so that clients can perform more smoothly,” says Dwa.But it took the team quite a while to understand and expand to this level. Pathak shares, “We started with only a handful of people at St Xavier’s. First, it took us time to enter the gate and make the school understand. But we convinced them and started our journey. The wait for the first step was long, the very next day, we got some five other clients and we were working full time.”With the new roles, the team also took together the realisation that it had to develop the platform considering that there will be people who will not be so technologically adept. “This is why we kept the platform, its interface and the steps as simple as possible so that they will be easy to use for all. And we also made sure to train all the staffers on how to use the app,” shares Pathak.To cater to the diverse user groups, the app is available in both Nepali and English. And, all the updates come in one timeline form, similar to Facebook, so that staying updated for anyone is just a scroll away.“There was a problem at the beginning. But we had a team set in the field to cater to any queries or technical problems,” he adds, saying that now the team now knows and is prepared for the needs of the clients and the problems that might arise.The team says the pandemic experience also helped it cope with the resistance from parents who were not familiar with the technology. “Also, many parents are in their 30s now, and they are technologically sound, so the particular problem is decreasing,” adds Piya.The co-founders of Veda were one of the few early young entrepreneurs that Nepal saw as Veda started in May 2016. Now with all the experience and work, it has gained the trust and tied with more than 900 big and small, public and private schools in Kathmandu, Mustang, Chitwan, Janakpur, Nepalgunjg and Butwal among others, with more than 1.6 million users. “As a part of our corporate social responsibility, we have also tied up with 70-80 government schools,” adds Piya.Veda has made its presence known outside the country too by working with schools from Brunei and Japan. “We had plans to expand, but even before we executed them, the foreign schools approached us online, knowing about our product. And we feel validated to get the clients who sought us,” Dwa says. “The schools that work with us always give our referrals, since the start, so we are growing and happy about it.” Validation also comes from the many awards it has bagged so far.  “We are ISO-certified and IRD-listed. We have also received the National ICT award, and the Microsoft award, and last year got listed in Forbes 30 and 30 Asia. And we are looking forward to more.”“Apart from us, the schools using Veda that win awards and perform well across the country also acknowledge our platform and give us credit for their success. That makes us happier than our own accolades,” adds Pathak.Kathmandu, May 16Ang Tawa Sherpa, a former Nepali Congress lawmaker, has surrendered himself to the police after facing an arrest warrant over the fake Bhutanese refugee scam.Earlier, an arrest warrant was issued against him after an arrestee named Sherpa as one of the people involved in the high-profile scam.Following that, Sherpa went to the Kathmandu District Police Range on Monday, according to an official.In connection with the same case, influential Nepali Congress leader Bal Krishna Khand is in custody whereas CPN-UML secretary Top Bahadur Rayamajhi has also been arrested.Kathmandu, May 16Internet service providers (ISPs) have been instructed not to charge more than the prescribed internet fees set by the Nepal Telecommunications Authority.This comes after some service providers increased their fees on their own.Some ISPs increased fees stating they were given the green light by the authority. However, the authority has said it has made no decision allowing ISPs to increase internet fees.According to the Telecommunications Act, ISPs can only increase the tariff after the approval notice is published by the authority.The authority says that no service provider has been given permission to increase the tariff recently.Kathmandu, May 16Launched in the initiative of the Confederation of Nepalese Industries, another edition of the Make in Nepal Summit was held today at Hotel Yak & Yeti, Kathmandu on Tuesday. As a part of the Make In Nepal Abhiyan (campaign), the event was held in a bid to boost its economy and create sustainable growth, Various speakers who addressed the event highlighted how Nepal has embarked on an ambitious journey to better its economy. Industry and Commerce Minister Ramesh Rijal in his address highlighted the need for holistic growth of the industry sector and the government’s role in the process.Also addressing the event, economist and lawmaker Swarnim Wagle said there is a need for the country to better its manufacturing sector, and move beyond mere assembling and distribution. He emphasised the need for resources, skilled workers, technologies, and policies. He also drew attention to the urgent need for resources and policy changes that address the challenges posed by an ageing population, and the need to work on the inevitable problems it will pose to the economy.Other speakers and panellists also spoke on how creating an ecosystem that supports and encourages youth and women entrepreneurs is important while fostering inclusivity and economic empowerment. Speakers talked about the significance of developing diplomatic and economic relationships with neighbouring countries such as India and China and easing the trade for those who want to work in Nepal. As Nepal eagerly awaits the budget announcement this month, experts and speakers also highlighted the need to revise policies for better economic projections and predictions.Apart from the keynote speeches, the ‘Make in Nepal’ event held four plenary sessions on building industrial ecosystems, industrial infrastructures, the potential of natural resources, and effective budget implementation.Schools in Nepal are always busy; many of them are even chaotic. There are students busy catching up with the syllabus of different subjects and teachers preparing for the classes, checking the papers and results. Talk to the people involved in school management, most of them tell you why the country’s school management system needs a revolution.There are over 30,000 schools in Nepal, and the majority of them are still undertaking the process manually. Students have to write long papers and teachers either take the copies home or stay back at school burning the midnight oil. Then, working parents, in particular, have a hard time checking their wards’ progress. Perhaps the sector awaits a digital revolution. Realising this, a team of young entrepreneurs have introduced Veda to many schools across the country.Now, with Veda, students and teachers save their time staying updated with the syllabus and grading the exams whereas parents have an easier way to stay updated with their children’s progress. Veda has mentored and guided more than 900 schools in Nepal, solving their basic and managerial system. Veda is a school management software application designed specifically for schools by Ingrails, a software company. The flagship app is the team’s attempt to digitise the entire education system and improve the knowledge-sharing process among teachers and students in Nepal. Veda is the brainchild of three young entrepreneurs who co-founded Ingrails: Nirdesh Dwa, Sujit Pathak and Sanjan Piya.Chief Executive Officer Dwa explains, “Veda includes customisable features like monitoring and managing visitor records, enrolment processes, staff management, archiving, inventory, homework and classwork management and checking, results, record keeping of students (attendance, health, merits, progress), billing and financing management, and library systems.”Additionally, schools can keep and manage records as well as other carry out evaluations of disciplinary and performance reports, similar to those used by the Ivy League, for all levels from class 1 to 10. “One can also look at the progress report of a child as they graduate the classes in one platform.”“The platform has been built with a mix of ERP (enterprise resource planning) systems and MIS (management information system). Any piece of information can be easily disseminated among the users within the system easing the communication among the school administration, teachers, students, and even parents,” he adds.Available in both web and mobile-based versions, Veda is more useful in desktop versions, but communication and tracking progress with mobile has been arguably the best feature of the app. “We realised that there was a communication gap between the school and the teachers, and our platform has abridged it significantly. They went from spending a lot of time and money on sending notices and updates through letters to digitising the whole process,” says Managing Director Pathak.According to Dwa, the app was not the same in the beginning. “We started as an offshore company, and we had been working with clients abroad. We knew each other and wanted to build our own company. But only after working in the sector for a while, we started noticing that there were gaps in the market in all sectors. Then, we decided to focus on education.”There were a few apps that some schools were using, but Nepali edtech companies had limited themselves to making accounting software. “So there were other many gaps in the system that we could address, starting with digitising of the manual management system and records. We first conducted thorough research on the history and current trends of the education industry.”Chief Operating Officer Sanjan Piya explains, “The Veda version we have today has evolved through many updates and research as well as our learning and failures. By understanding the needs of the schools, and addressing their individual needs, we can modify the platform and I believe, schools can basically all services that an institution might need.”While many platforms have focused on accounting software, attendance and billing, Veda also brought staff management systems, along with teacher evaluation and performance of administration, in an attempt to multiply the output. “They are able to trace the project and make more data-driven decisions.”Meanwhile, during the Covid pandemic, the Veda team helped the schools navigate through the new normal of online learning, making the whole process more seamless.But the developers want to clarify that they do not want to replace the teachers, staff, students or parents or their roles but only aim to empower them and automate their work. And all this makes Veda better than its competitors, claim the co-founders. Even though people do not know about Veda by name, they claim, people have used and appreciated the app in one way or the other.To achieve long-term satisfaction and loyalty from their users, the team says it has always prioritised giving technical support to the clients, with continuous feedback and adjustments. “Our biggest team is the technical support team so that clients can perform more smoothly,” says Dwa.But it took the team quite a while to understand and expand to this level. Pathak shares, “We started with only a handful of people at St Xavier’s. First, it took us time to enter the gate and make the school understand. But we convinced them and started our journey. The wait for the first step was long, the very next day, we got some five other clients and we were working full time.”With the new roles, the team also took together the realisation that it had to develop the platform considering that there will be people who will not be so technologically adept. “This is why we kept the platform, its interface and the steps as simple as possible so that they will be easy to use for all. And we also made sure to train all the staffers on how to use the app,” shares Pathak.To cater to the diverse user groups, the app is available in both Nepali and English. And, all the updates come in one timeline form, similar to Facebook, so that staying updated for anyone is just a scroll away.“There was a problem at the beginning. But we had a team set in the field to cater to any queries or technical problems,” he adds, saying that now the team now knows and is prepared for the needs of the clients and the problems that might arise.The team says the pandemic experience also helped it cope with the resistance from parents who were not familiar with the technology. “Also, many parents are in their 30s now, and they are technologically sound, so the particular problem is decreasing,” adds Piya.The co-founders of Veda were one of the few early young entrepreneurs that Nepal saw as Veda started in May 2016. Now with all the experience and work, it has gained the trust and tied with more than 900 big and small, public and private schools in Kathmandu, Mustang, Chitwan, Janakpur, Nepalgunjg and Butwal among others, with more than 1.6 million users. “As a part of our corporate social responsibility, we have also tied up with 70-80 government schools,” adds Piya.Veda has made its presence known outside the country too by working with schools from Brunei and Japan. “We had plans to expand, but even before we executed them, the foreign schools approached us online, knowing about our product. And we feel validated to get the clients who sought us,” Dwa says. “The schools that work with us always give our referrals, since the start, so we are growing and happy about it.” Validation also comes from the many awards it has bagged so far.  “We are ISO-certified and IRD-listed. We have also received the National ICT award, and the Microsoft award, and last year got listed in Forbes 30 and 30 Asia. And we are looking forward to more.”“Apart from us, the schools using Veda that win awards and perform well across the country also acknowledge our platform and give us credit for their success. That makes us happier than our own accolades,” adds Pathak.Neocolonialism is a term used to describe the economic and political influence that developed countries exert over developing countries, often through indirect means such as international trade, foreign investment and international aid. Nepal, a small landlocked country located in the Himalayas, has been subject to neocolonialism although it has not been a colony politically.Consequently, it is making significant negative impacts on the Nepali economy and politics. So it is about time the country thought of the solutions.One of the most significant negative impacts of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy is the unequal distribution of resources and wealth. Developed countries often use their economic power to extract resources from developing countries at a low cost, leaving little for local populations. This has been the case in Nepal, where multinational corporations have been granted access to the country’s natural resources, such as timber and minerals, at a low cost. This has resulted in the depletion of natural resources, environmental degradation, and a loss of revenue for the Nepali government.Furthermore, neocolonialism has led to the exploitation of Nepali labour. Many multinational corporations have established factories in Nepal, taking advantage of cheap labour and relaxed labour laws. These corporations often pay low wages and provide poor working conditions, leading to the exploitation of workers. This has resulted in a decline in the standard of living for many Nepali citizens.In addition to the impacts on the Nepali economy, neocolonialism has also had a negative impact on Nepal’s political system. Developed countries often use their economic power to influence the political decisions of developing countries. In Nepal, this has resulted in a lack of political autonomy, with decisions often being made to appease foreign governments and corporations rather than to benefit the Nepali people. This has led to corruption, a lack of transparency and a weakening of democratic institutions.Moreover, the influence of foreign powers in Nepal’s political system has resulted in a lack of investment in key areas such as education, healthcare and infrastructure. Developed countries often prioritise investments that benefit their own economies, not the Nepali economy. This has resulted in a lack of investment in critical areas, leaving Nepal’s citizens without access to basic services.Neocolonialism can inflict significant trauma on the Nepali economy and politics. They have been explained below:So, to eradicate the effect of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics, Nepal should follow the following measures:• Diversifying the economy: Nepal’s economy heavily relies on agriculture, tourism, and remittances, making it vulnerable to the external shocks of neocolonialism. Diversifying the economy by investing in new industries, such as technology and manufacturing, could reduce the country’s dependence on these sectors and strengthen its economic independence.• Promoting fair trade: Nepal could work to promote fair trade practices that prioritise the needs of local businesses and communities over foreign corporations. This could involve developing policies that protect local producers and workers from exploitation and support the growth of domestic industries and the Nepali economy, overall.• Investing in education: Education is a powerful tool for reducing neocolonialism’s effects by empowering citizens with knowledge and skills to participate actively in their country’s economic and political systems. Nepal could invest in education by increasing access to schools, improving the quality of education, and supporting vocational training programmes that equip young people with relevant skills.• Strengthening political institutions: Strengthening democratic institutions is an essential step in reducing neocolonialism’s effects on Nepal’s politics. This could involve promoting transparency and accountability in government, increasing civic participation, and supporting the development of independent media that can hold the government accountable.• Building regional cooperation: Nepal could work to build stronger regional cooperation with neighbouring countries, such as India and China, to reduce its dependence on Western powers on the Nepali economy and politics and increase its bargaining power in international negotiations. This could involve collaborating on infrastructure projects, trade agreements, and cultural exchanges that promote mutual understanding and respect.Overall, reducing the effects of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics will require sustained efforts across multiple fronts. By diversifying the economy, promoting fair trade practices, investing in education, strengthening political institutions, and building regional cooperation, Nepal can take steps towards greater economic and political independence.Kathmandu, May 15Sajha Yatayat is expanding its electric bus service on a new route in Kathmandu.The company has started to operate three electric buses on the Patandhoka-Ratnapark-Gyaneshwar-Ratopul-Gaushala-Chabahil-Boddha-Jorpati-Dakshindhoka route from Monday.According to the cooperative’s General Manager Mahendra Raj Pandey, the company plans to run 15 electric buses on this route in the future.Out of the 40 electric vehicles brought by the company, only three were in operation. Now, with three more being used on a new route, it is looking to expand its network and use the electric buses it bought from China.On April 17, Captain Sobit Gauchan received a call from Annapurna base camp. A few climbers, unable to move due to different reasons, needed rescuing and Gauchan, who has become the go-to guy for rescues in Nepal’s mountains, flew to Camp 3 on Annapurna and rescued a French climber and his guide from around 6,500 metres.“It was very difficult landing there. The helicopter was at its full limit and getting out was a challenge. Thankfully, everything went as planned as I was able to bring the climber down,” says Gauchan.Two days later, he was back at Annapurna. This time, the mission was to drop rescuers near a crevasse around 6,000 metres to find Indian climber Anurag Maloo. That was not all; he had to bring Maloo down, fly back up to 6,000 metres to get the climbers down while doctors assessed Maloo at the base camp and then fly him to Pokhara’s Manipal Hospital.“Everything had to be done very quickly. Had I not flown to Dana from Kathmandu on April 19, I think we would have had a different story. Everyone involved in this rescue did a great job,” says Gauchan.For Sobit Gauchan, this is a normal day at the office. Ever since he became a helicopter pilot a decade ago, he has been involved in hundreds of rescues. He has done it all as he has carried sick patients from the remotest parts of Nepal to those injured during the 2015 earthquake along with many rescues from high in the mountains of Nepal.Now, Gauchan wants to pave the way for the new generation and wants to raise issues in aviation in Nepal as he believes the right discourses are not taking place for the benefit of the sector in Nepal.“We only talk after there are problems but we never talk about solutions. Hopefully, things will change,” he says.Sobit Gauchan’s journey started in the Philippines. After his dream of joining the British Gurkha troops ended, he decided to go to become an aeroplane pilot. But something changed and he decided to switch to helicopters and the rest is history.“I cannot remember what, but as I look back, it was the right call.”After coming back to Nepal, he started working at Air Dynasty as a co-pilot. Since then, he has never looked back as he became a captain in less than a decade.Compared to when he started, things in the 2020s are different. Even though the industry as a whole has grown, human resource growth is quite poor, Sobit Gauchan says. When he was coming through the ranks, he got a lot of opportunities to fly alongside a senior pilot. That helped him gain experience flying into the remote terrains of Nepal.But now, with rescues being conducted with only one pilot, he feels that is restricting up-and-coming pilots from gaining important experiences where they can learn from someone senior.“You learn more when you are in the thick of it rather than just by listening to others or on the simulator,” he says, adding he understands this will not change anytime soon unless the regulators do not do anything about it.But as pilots, they need more exposure as they have to be calculative with very low to no margin for error. This is especially true when he conducts rescues in the mountains. As decisions need to be taken rapidly, Sobit Gauchan goes to the spot with alternate plans and that has helped him save countless lives.“I think, in Nepal, we do rescue and risk assessment very fast. That is a great quality and helps as in most terrains we fly to weather changes in an instant.”His toughest time as a pilot came in the aftermath of the 2015 earthquake. With the entire country reeling, he, like many other pilots, conducted around 100 flights a day. With aftershocks a norm, the situation was extremely chaotic. People wanted him to take them first, leaving him in Hobson’s choice.“Some had broken hands while others had broken bones. It was hard to not be emotionally involved during those times. I felt I was playing multiple roles. I was a pilot, a counsellor and a doctor all rolled into one,” he says.That is a reason Gauchan feels things need to change for helicopter pilots. He believes their role is too dynamic as is their line of work. This, he feels, is resulting in helicopter accidents taking place in the country regularly. And this, in a country like Nepal where aviation rules are as strict as they come, is a major concern.“Our helicopters and aeroplanes are checked every other day, yet these accidents are taking place. It shows where we are at the moment,” he says. This indicates where the industry is heading as pilots like Gauchan feel they are not getting enough support. They feel the blame is put on them in almost all accidents that take place, but no one, not even the Civil Aviation Authority of Nepal, sees the bigger picture.Accidents in the past happened due to changing weather and the pilot unintentionally flying into a hill. But in recent cases, it is different as weather factors have not been involved in any of them. The line of work for a helicopter pilot is so dynamic that pilots do not have time to implement their defence mechanism as it changes based on what they are doing.“One moment we are taking people to Camp 2 on Everest and an hour later, we are taking a load to remote hills in Nepal. That is not all. We also take passengers which makes things really complicated for us as our workload is increasing.”They also have to fly to unknown areas where they have not flown to and are asked to land on difficult terrains which makes flying quite challenging in Nepal.“No one cares about us, to be honest,” Gauchan says.On top of that, each accident is seen differently by CAAN which takes decisions with one particular incident in mind. That, Gauchan feels, is quite unnecessary as it adds to the problem and not the solution.“The regulators need to be competent. Right now, they are like autocratic rulers who only place orders and do not come up with solutions. This needs to change.”Gauchan hopes things changes and he wants to continue to focus on raising discourses within the aviation sector. While he does that, he is gearing up to start his own helicopter company through which he wants to provide top-class service and make rescue service oriented.“I’ve seen people die while I’m rescuing them and felt helpless. I want to ensure that these people are given the best chance to survive when they fly with my company,” he says.In the long run, he wants to start free services to those who cannot afford helicopter rescues. But, for that to happen, it will take time as he wants to earn the trust of people and then seek donations.“I want things to be transparent and people to help me with this goal of mine. Hopefully, everything will fall in place,” Gauchan says.Every week or at regular intervals, you must come across the public programmes held for blood donation or see pleas online for blood. But have you ever asked yourself: why bother about it? But you must know that blood donation is a noble work, a selfless act that can make a significant difference in someone’s life. There are many reasons why you should consider donating blood, including that it can save up to three lives with just one donation and it keeps you healthy too. If you are doubting why you should donate your blood, here is some key information you need to know about blood donation, how it works, and its other components.Donating blood is an act of kindness that can help save up to three lives. The blood you donate can be used to help people who have been in accidents, who have undergone surgery, or who have medical conditions that require blood transfusions. So, it is an easy way to give back to your community and help those in need. There is a constant need for blood, so you can be a donor and help meet the demand.Donating blood is a simple process that usually takes less than an hour. The equipment used to collect blood is sterile, so there is no risk of infection. Studies have shown blood donation can lower the risk of heart disease, stroke, and certain types of cancer. It can also help your body produce new blood cells.In Nepal, to be eligible for blood donation, one must be:If you are under any medication, it might impact whether you will be able to donate too.The minimum required gap between the two blood donations currently is three months. However, new research has concluded that it can be 56 days (or eight weeks). So, the local spearheaders of the field are pushing for that too in Nepal so that blood donors, as well as blood, will be more readily available.The amount of blood collected typically ranges from 400 to 500 millilitres, depending on the donation centre and the individual’s weight and height as well as the status of blood pressure. After the donation, the blood is tested for infections like HIV, hepatitis B and C, and syphilis, to ensure that the blood is safe to use.The blood bags collected from blood donation drives are then separated into various components, such as red blood cells, plasma and platelets. Each component is used to treat different medical conditions, such as anaemia, bleeding disorders and cancer.Once the blood has been processed and tested, it is stored in a blood bank until it is needed for a patient. Blood can be stored for up to 42 days, depending on the component. When a patient needs a blood transfusion, a matching blood type is selected from the blood bank and the appropriate component is transfused into the patient’s bloodstream.In the lab, the blood is centrifuged and separated into red cells, platelets, and plasma. Sometimes, whole blood is used for transfusion as it is. The blood is cross-matched to ensure that it is a good match for the recipient against a sample of the recipient’s blood to determine compatibility.Once the blood has been cleared for use, as mentioned above, it is separated into different components, such as red blood cells, platelets, and plasma, based on the specific needs of patients. The blood components are then stored in refrigerators until they are needed for transfusions. The components of blood can then be used for different medical purposes, depending on the needs of the recipient. Nepal has a big market for Bollywood and any Bollywood celebrities coming to this small country is big news. The same happened earlier this week as star Amir Khan landed in Kathmandu, reportedly for a 10-day Vipassana meditation camp.As Khan’s Nepali fans were happy about him coming to Kathmandu, the news left many of them wondering what this Vipassana is all about. So to quench your curiosity, here we explain the idea and its growing popularity in Nepal.Vipassana is a technique of meditation. It is claimed to be one of the oldest types of meditation and is often related to the teachings of Gautam Buddha. Although it is frequently taught in the context of Buddhism, meditation is not affiliated with any religious or spiritual tradition. It has grown in popularity across the world as a secular practice in which individuals of all backgrounds and faiths can participate.Vipassana or ‘vi’ ‘passana’ means a special insight or clear sight in the ancient Pali language. In Vipassana meditation, practitioners typically focus their attention on their breath, bodily sensations, or other objects of awareness. The goal is to cultivate mindfulness and develop a deep understanding of the impermanence, dissatisfaction and the nature of existence. So, it can be understood that the practice of Vipassana meditation aims to develop insight by observing something, with heightened awareness, especially in life or the present moment, without judgment or attachment.Anyone wanting to be enrolled in Vipassana and get the experience can reach out to:Vipassana meditation is often taught in retreat settings, where participants dedicate a period, ranging from a few days to several weeks, to intensive practice. These retreats typically involve periods of silent meditation, guided instructions and group discussions to support the participants’ progress.The practice of Vipassana meditation typically involves: Though it is open and designed for all, the experience and benefits of meditation can vary from person to person and at different levels. But here are some expected results.In other words, such transformative practice can lead to personal growth and positive behavioural changes. One may experience shifts in attitudes, values, and habits, leading to personal growth, increased well-being, and a more meaningful and purposeful life.Vipassana courses are available in a variety of lengths, formats and levels of intensity. Depending on the Vipassana organisation or tradition, the particular offers may differ. Here are some examples of popular Vipassana courses:The Newa community, the natives of the Kathmandu valley, is known for its festivals and jatras. But this community is equally rich in food and culinary style too. Almost every month, there is a fest in a Newa neighbourhood for the purpose of getting together with family members, relatives and friends. The Newa people have their own culture of eating, which distinguishes them from others. Suku bhwoe is one kind of feast and dining culture in which attendees eat by sitting on a sukul, a carpet made up of hay. However, this kind of feast is losing its charm these days as the sukul is being replaced by chairs and tables. But why?Cultural expert Om Dhaubhadel says the suku bhwoe culture is getting unpopular due to a busy lifestyle and modernity. “People from the Newa community used to enjoy this feast where the host would serve a variety of dishes to the attendees who sat closely on a sukul.”  He says that people have become too busy these days that they do not have time for such time-consuming arrangements. It applies in the case of both organisers and the attendees. In the suku bhwoe system, the food is served serially and one cannot leave the feast until the entire food arrives. He says, “Just like in a party palace, we cannot leave suku bhwoe by just eating what we like. It is not a buffet system.”  The other thing that makes suku bhwoe uncomfortable is modern-day attire. It is difficult to sit cross-legged on the floor wearing a modern dress. Sitting on a sukul by wearing a skirt, pants, half-pants and lehenga is uncomfortable. “This is also a reason for the declining charm of suku bhwoe,” says Dhaubhadel. According to him, the importance of sukul bhwoe has not been explained to the younger generation. The young generation considers it a hassle to arrange it, leading to a sharp decline. Here are some interesting details about suku bhwoe. In the Newa community, it is conducted during auspicious occasions such as rice feeding ceremonies, suryadarshans, bratabandhas, weddings, wedding anniversaries, ratharohans and guthi events. Likewise, it is also conducted after the death ritual. “It used to take place during all the jatras and festivals, but now it is conducted only in guthi events and death rituals,” says Dhaubadel. Some of the popular cuisines served during a suku bhwoe are chiura (beaten rice), leafy greens, garlic, buffalo curry, and different beans that include kerau (pea), chana (gram), simi (black eye pea), and simpu (cannellini beans). The other dishes are cauliflower, potato, chhyala (soup with bamboo shoots), spinach, bhutan (fried organ meat) and jujudhau (curd). The feast ends with a serving of radishes, carrots and some pieces of fruits as a salad. According to Dhaubadel, the exact date when this culture began is not confirmed. He assumes that the Newa community conceptualised it while developing their culture and civilisation. This story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Kathmandu, May 14Summiting Everest at around 9 am on Sunday, Pasang Dawa Sherpa has equalled the record for the most number of summits of the mountain.With his latest summit of Everest, Pasang Dawa also known as Pa Dawa has climbed the mountain 26 times, a record he currently holds with Kami Rita Sherpa.Kami Rita is also on Everest aiming for the 27th ascent of the highest mountain in the world.Pasang Dawa, a mountain guide working for Imagine Nepal, guided Marton Peter Price from Hungary to the summit of Everest, informed Mingma G Sherpa, the managing director of Imagine Nepal.Pasang Dawa climbed after routes were fixed to the summit of the mountain by a team led by Dawa Gyalje Sherpa from Imagine Nepal on Saturday afternoon.Nearly 500 people have obtained the permit to climb Everest this year.Kathmandu, May 13The season’s first Everest summit has been recorded as the rope-fixing team from Imagine Nepal reached the summit of the mountain on Saturday afternoon.The team, led by IFMGA guide Dawa Gyalje Sherpa, reached the summit of the mountain at 1:52 pm on Saturday. Nine Nepali climbers reached the summit opening the routes for others to follow.“This has not been easy due to variable weather, but our team has done it,” says Mingma G from Imagine Nepal. “It was an emotional, mental and physical challenge.”Nima Nuru Sherpa, Lhakpa Sona Sherpa, Dipen Gurung, Pasang Ngima Sherpa, Lhakpa Tenjing Sherpa, Phur Galjen Sherpa, Dawa Jangbu Sherpa and Suman Gurung along with Dawa Gyalje were involved in rope fixing at Everest this year.Imagine Nepal has said it is also bringing back old ropes from the mountain. “Our team will continue to collect more rubbish from south Cole and above upon returning from the summit,” says Mingma G. Nearly 500 people have obtained the permit to climb Everest this year. Some will begin their summit push on Saturday evening, say sources from the mountain.Nepal being a trekkers’ paradise is an open secret. The country sees nearly 100,000 trekkers walking on trains like Everest base camp, Annapurna base camp, Langtang and Annapurna circuit every year. But apart from these commercial routes, the are many hidden gems in Nepal that will leave you wanting more.These hidden gems stretch out from Kanchenjunga base camp in the east to Limi valley in the far west. These trails are untouched and are rarely trekked by many foreigners. It is remote and untouched by modern amenities as you go back in time living with basics. In most of these hidden gems in Nepal, you will have to take maps, tents and cooking utensils and preferably a guide (or a porter) too as these off-beaten paths might be tricky and chances of getting lost are quite high.Nepal has multiple Panch Pokharis, which translates to five ponds. But Panch Pokhari in the Sindhupalchok district, east of Kathmandu, may be the prettiest one and one of the least explored hidden gems in Nepal. The trek is short and sweet, yet it takes you above the hills you see east of Kathmandu. The trek is quite raw and does not have many tea houses along the way and even the ones you find do not have single rooms as you will have to sleep in a dorm that usually caters to pilgrims that go there during Janaipurnima, a famous Hindu festival.The view from Panch Pokahri is quite majestic. The Jugal Himal is right in your face, but what stands out the most is the sunrise seen from the top of the Panch Pokhari along with the evening sunset. The best time to get there is November.The guerrilla trek trail is one of the newly-discovered hidden gems in Nepal. This trekking route follows the path used by Maoist rebels during the armed conflict. The trail starts from Beni near Pokhara and ends in Jelbang in Rolpa.The trek is not difficult but given its remoteness, it is tricky as you walk through places that you might get lost in. But that said, the trek takes you through remote villages, beautiful forests and stunning landscapes and you get to see sights the Maoist guerillas saw including their training camps.As the trail is also relatively new, facilities like accommodation and food are not well developed in some places but if you like walking through the hidden gems in Nepal such as the trails not many have walked, this should be on your bucket list.One of the hidden gems in Nepal, the Tamang heritage trail in Nepal is a popular beginner’s trek, yet not many people venture out into these villages in northern Rasuwa. The trek, as the name suggests, takes you to remote Tamang villages and offers a unique opportunity to experience the local culture and lifestyle of the Tamang people, who are known for their hospitality, rich cultural heritage, and traditional practices.Along the way, you will visit several traditional Tamang villages, including Gatlang, Tatopani, Thuman, and Briddim, where you can experience their unique culture and lifestyle.The Tamang heritage trail is best suited for those who want to see more than just mountains. This trek gives people a chance to experience people and their behaviour in the remote part of Nepal.This is one the most remote and challenging treks in Nepal, hence of the greatest hidden gems in Nepal, that takes you to the remotest parts of western Nepal. Apart from the glorious views of mountains, hills and lakes, the trek also gives people a great opportunity to experience the local culture and lifestyle of people living there. The area is untouched but modern amenities make the experience of trekking there even more special as it takes you to traditional Dolpo villages, including Shey Gompa, which is home to a famous Tibetan monastery and a sacred crystal mountain.That said, it takes nearly a month to trek this trail requires crossing high mountain passes, including Kang La Pass (5,360m) and Saldang La Pass (5,200m). Only opt for this if you are fit and have experience trekking in the wilderness before. This trek is probably the most remote and off-the-beaten-path trek on this list of hidden gems in Nepal. Not many people trek to the Limi valley, which is in the northwestern part of Nepal. The place is so remote many people fly there to catch glimpses of Mount Kailash where Hindus believe Lord Shiva lives.The trek to Limi valley begins from Simikot and takes you through beautiful landscapes, including high mountain passes and deep valleys. You also walk past several ancient monasteries, including the Halji and Jhang monasteries, which are some of the oldest and most important monasteries in the region.It takes around 20 days to complete this trek and you will have to camp almost the entire trek as there are no tea houses along the trail. The trek is challenging, but the rewards are well worth the effort of exploring hidden gems in Nepal.The Saipal base camp trek in Nepal is another remote and off-the-beaten-path trek that takes you through various hidden gems in Nepal around the beautiful Saipal Himal range in the far-western region.Like the treks above, this too offers trekkers a chance to experience the natural beauty of the region while exploring traditional villages and enjoying stunning views of the snow-capped peaks along the way.The trek begins at Chainpur and takes you through beautiful landscapes, including high mountain passes and stunning lakes. The trek takes you through places like Bajhang, Dandakot, and Saipal, which are known for their unique culture and lifestyle.The trek takes nearly three weeks and makes you walk past Saipal La at 4,200 metres. This trek also requires people to camp most of the way as there are no tea houses.Close to Saipal is Api Himal, which is again one of the remotest hidden gems in Nepal. The trek takes you to the base of Api Himal, the highest mountain in far-western Nepal. The trek begins from the town of Gokuleshwor and takes you through beautiful landscapes and past high mountain passes. The trek takes you through several traditional villages, including Choyo, Dharapani, and Ghusa, which are known for their unique culture and lifestyle.With no tea houses, you have to camp along the trail and maybe that is what makes the trek stand out among other hidden gems in Nepal.This off-the-beaten-path trek takes you to the beautiful Badimalika region in far-western Nepal. The natural beauty of the place is unique as is its unique culture and lifestyle. The region is named after the Badimalika temple, which is a sacred Hindu pilgrimage site at an altitude of 4,400 metres.The Badimalika region, as one of the hidden gems in Nepal, is also untouched by modernisation and offers a unique opportunity for trekkers to experience the remote and unspoiled beauty of the Himalayas. The region is also known for its wildlife, including snow leopards, Himalayan black bears, and musk deer, and is home to several rare and endangered plant species. Lush green post-monsoon, the colour of the region changes significantly during autumn and winter. The place is magical and is worth a visit.Located in the Manaslu region, the Tsum valley trek takes you to an unspoiled and untouched region of Nepal. There is a certain mysticism to this trek as the culture and traditions found here are truly unique. The people living there are of Tibetan origin and are primarily Buddhists. That is why the region has several ancient monasteries and gompas, including the Rachen Gompa and Mu Gompa, which are important pilgrimage sites for Buddhists.The trek takes you through beautiful landscapes, including lush forests, alpine meadows, and high mountain passes, offering stunning views of the surrounding snow-capped peaks. The trek also takes you through several traditional villages, where you can enjoy panoramic views of the surrounding mountains and valleys.Trekking to the Tsum valley takes you close to the Ganesh Himal too and if you climb high, you can also see the Tibetan plateaus to the north. The trek also takes you through traditional villages like Chumling, Chhokangparo, and Nile, where you can experience the traditional culture of people living around hidden gems in Nepal.Pasang Lhamu Sherpa was a fierce woman. At a time when women had to live up to certain standards of society, she just did not care what others thought of her.She hated it when someone told her she could not do something. Her mother told her she could not attend school like her brothers did. Her father told her she could not come on expeditions with him. This infuriated Pasang Lhamu, and rightly so.She wanted to break the shackles and ensure women from the Sherpa community and the country could dream big and by standing on the summit of Everest on April 22, 1993, she did exactly that.At a time when women were asked to stay home and look after their families, Pasang Lhamu Sherpa chose the extreme and decided to follow her dream. This came at a cost as she died during her descent, but her journey did not go in vain as she was able to inspire thousands of Nepali women.A recently screened documentary on her titled Pasang: In the Shadow of Everest tells exactly that. It tells the story of Pasang Lhamu Sherpa and her sheer will, courage, obsession, and why she wanted to climb Everest.The documentary takes us into the life of Pasang Lhamu Sherpa and shows us how hard it was for her, a woman, to go out and do something in a sport dominated by men.She felt that first-hand as the documentary shows how French alpinist Marc Batard in 1990 told her to head back down from the mountain as the expedition leader did not think she could reach the summit.It tells us how she was told by everyone that she should stay home and look after her children and not venture out into the mountains where she could lose her life.But Pasang Lhamu Sherpa did not listen to anyone as she persevered towards her goal – to become the first Nepali woman to climb Everest. Her bivouacking in the south summit in 1991 is proof of that as she proved how mentally strong she was.“Women from across the world have done wonders because they got the opportunities that we living in Nepal haven’t. I want to prove that we too can do the unthinkable,” she is heard saying in the film.And she is right. Before her, 16 women from all over the world had climbed Everest. While they climbed, no one from Nepal even dreamt of climbing it.The documentary on Pasang Lhamu Sherpa took nearly a decade to be made and relied on archived footage shot by news agencies in Nepal and foreigners. But the story it has told is simple yet powerful.The director, Nancy Svendsen, even tracked down Pemba Norbu who is the last person to see Pasang Lhamu alive.The film also shows how hard it was for her to fund the expedition on her own as Pasang Lhamu and her husband Sonam sold 60 per cent of their company to fund it.She tried to seek help from the government and even spoke to the prime minister, but even that was in vain as she had to pay permit fees to climb the mountain.The film shows how her eldest daughter, Dawa Futi Sherpa, is going back to find her mother and is trying to tell Pasang Lhamu Sherpa’s story to the world.It also shows how much her husband Sonam Sherpa, who she eloped with, supported her on her quest. In all four of her attempts, Soman was on Everest rallying her and ensuring things were in place for his wife to create history.On her trips to Europe with Sonam, Pasang Lhamu Sherpa saw how women ventured out into adventure activities, after which she climbed Mont Blanc. A wife of a Nepali climber accompanying him on his adventures in Europe is quite rare even today so Pasang Lhamu doing this in the 80s when the society was as conservative as ever, is something quite rare.Yet, there she was at Chamonix dreaming of climbing Mount Everest and becoming the first woman to do so.Svendsen travelled to Nepal and France to make this film and worked on it extensively with Pasang Lhamu Sherpa’s daughter Dawa Futi. She has done a tremendous job to show Pasang Lhamu’s courage and tenacity and how she dealt with problems at every turn in her life including from the society that questioned why a mother of three was risking her life to climb Everest.“Dawa learned so much about her mother and saw so many pictures and movies that she had never seen before because the family didn’t have them. This has been a process of healing for them,” Svendsen told the Golden Globe Awards in March 2022.Since it was released in 2022, the film has been officially selected for 20 film festivals and has won awards in 11 of them including Telluride in Colorado, Kendall Mountain in the UK and the BANFF in Canada.The accolades might keep on coming for this film that tells the story of Pasang Lhamu Sherpa and her heroism that in a country like Nepal is rarely recognised. She inspired a generation of Nepali women who went out and did what they wanted to do in life. Nepali women like Lhakpa Sherpa, Dawa Yangzum Sherpa, Pasang Lhamu Akita and 62 others have climbed Everest following Pasang Lhamu Sherpa. Many others, like her daughter Dawa Futi, have broken shackles to do what they have wanted to do in life. And many after this film, which pays homage to this great lady, will do the same.Schools in Nepal are always busy; many of them are even chaotic. There are students busy catching up with the syllabus of different subjects and teachers preparing for the classes, checking the papers and results. Talk to the people involved in school management, most of them tell you why the country’s school management system needs a revolution.There are over 30,000 schools in Nepal, and the majority of them are still undertaking the process manually. Students have to write long papers and teachers either take the copies home or stay back at school burning the midnight oil. Then, working parents, in particular, have a hard time checking their wards’ progress. Perhaps the sector awaits a digital revolution. Realising this, a team of young entrepreneurs have introduced Veda to many schools across the country.Now, with Veda, students and teachers save their time staying updated with the syllabus and grading the exams whereas parents have an easier way to stay updated with their children’s progress. Veda has mentored and guided more than 900 schools in Nepal, solving their basic and managerial system. Veda is a school management software application designed specifically for schools by Ingrails, a software company. The flagship app is the team’s attempt to digitise the entire education system and improve the knowledge-sharing process among teachers and students in Nepal. Veda is the brainchild of three young entrepreneurs who co-founded Ingrails: Nirdesh Dwa, Sujit Pathak and Sanjan Piya.Chief Executive Officer Dwa explains, “Veda includes customisable features like monitoring and managing visitor records, enrolment processes, staff management, archiving, inventory, homework and classwork management and checking, results, record keeping of students (attendance, health, merits, progress), billing and financing management, and library systems.”Additionally, schools can keep and manage records as well as other carry out evaluations of disciplinary and performance reports, similar to those used by the Ivy League, for all levels from class 1 to 10. “One can also look at the progress report of a child as they graduate the classes in one platform.”“The platform has been built with a mix of ERP (enterprise resource planning) systems and MIS (management information system). Any piece of information can be easily disseminated among the users within the system easing the communication among the school administration, teachers, students, and even parents,” he adds.Available in both web and mobile-based versions, Veda is more useful in desktop versions, but communication and tracking progress with mobile has been arguably the best feature of the app. “We realised that there was a communication gap between the school and the teachers, and our platform has abridged it significantly. They went from spending a lot of time and money on sending notices and updates through letters to digitising the whole process,” says Managing Director Pathak.According to Dwa, the app was not the same in the beginning. “We started as an offshore company, and we had been working with clients abroad. We knew each other and wanted to build our own company. But only after working in the sector for a while, we started noticing that there were gaps in the market in all sectors. Then, we decided to focus on education.”There were a few apps that some schools were using, but Nepali edtech companies had limited themselves to making accounting software. “So there were other many gaps in the system that we could address, starting with digitising of the manual management system and records. We first conducted thorough research on the history and current trends of the education industry.”Chief Operating Officer Sanjan Piya explains, “The Veda version we have today has evolved through many updates and research as well as our learning and failures. By understanding the needs of the schools, and addressing their individual needs, we can modify the platform and I believe, schools can basically all services that an institution might need.”While many platforms have focused on accounting software, attendance and billing, Veda also brought staff management systems, along with teacher evaluation and performance of administration, in an attempt to multiply the output. “They are able to trace the project and make more data-driven decisions.”Meanwhile, during the Covid pandemic, the Veda team helped the schools navigate through the new normal of online learning, making the whole process more seamless.But the developers want to clarify that they do not want to replace the teachers, staff, students or parents or their roles but only aim to empower them and automate their work. And all this makes Veda better than its competitors, claim the co-founders. Even though people do not know about Veda by name, they claim, people have used and appreciated the app in one way or the other.To achieve long-term satisfaction and loyalty from their users, the team says it has always prioritised giving technical support to the clients, with continuous feedback and adjustments. “Our biggest team is the technical support team so that clients can perform more smoothly,” says Dwa.But it took the team quite a while to understand and expand to this level. Pathak shares, “We started with only a handful of people at St Xavier’s. First, it took us time to enter the gate and make the school understand. But we convinced them and started our journey. The wait for the first step was long, the very next day, we got some five other clients and we were working full time.”With the new roles, the team also took together the realisation that it had to develop the platform considering that there will be people who will not be so technologically adept. “This is why we kept the platform, its interface and the steps as simple as possible so that they will be easy to use for all. And we also made sure to train all the staffers on how to use the app,” shares Pathak.To cater to the diverse user groups, the app is available in both Nepali and English. And, all the updates come in one timeline form, similar to Facebook, so that staying updated for anyone is just a scroll away.“There was a problem at the beginning. But we had a team set in the field to cater to any queries or technical problems,” he adds, saying that now the team now knows and is prepared for the needs of the clients and the problems that might arise.The team says the pandemic experience also helped it cope with the resistance from parents who were not familiar with the technology. “Also, many parents are in their 30s now, and they are technologically sound, so the particular problem is decreasing,” adds Piya.The co-founders of Veda were one of the few early young entrepreneurs that Nepal saw as Veda started in May 2016. Now with all the experience and work, it has gained the trust and tied with more than 900 big and small, public and private schools in Kathmandu, Mustang, Chitwan, Janakpur, Nepalgunjg and Butwal among others, with more than 1.6 million users. “As a part of our corporate social responsibility, we have also tied up with 70-80 government schools,” adds Piya.Veda has made its presence known outside the country too by working with schools from Brunei and Japan. “We had plans to expand, but even before we executed them, the foreign schools approached us online, knowing about our product. And we feel validated to get the clients who sought us,” Dwa says. “The schools that work with us always give our referrals, since the start, so we are growing and happy about it.” Validation also comes from the many awards it has bagged so far.  “We are ISO-certified and IRD-listed. We have also received the National ICT award, and the Microsoft award, and last year got listed in Forbes 30 and 30 Asia. And we are looking forward to more.”“Apart from us, the schools using Veda that win awards and perform well across the country also acknowledge our platform and give us credit for their success. That makes us happier than our own accolades,” adds Pathak.With Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal expanding his Council of Ministers for the tenth time recently, the leadership of the Ministry of Women, Children and Senior Citizens has changed again. Succeeding Nepal Samajbadi Party leader Mahindra Raya Yadav, Nepali Congress leader Surendra Raj Acharya was appointed as the new minister.Yadav took charge of this ministry on March 31. But just after 33 days, he was transferred to the Ministry of Water Supply.Acharya is the fifth person to lead this ministry in the current government. A day after being sworn in, starting December 26, 2022, PM himself took over the leadership of this ministry. He held the position for 23 days. And, on January 17, CPN-UML’s Bhagawati Chaudhary got the responsibility. But when the UML left the government on February 27, Dahal took over this ministry again, making him the third change in the leadership. After him, Yadav and now Acharya took over the leadership. Five leadership changes in seven expansions of the cabinet, in such a short time, have only weakened the Ministry of Women. National Assembly member Kamala Pant says it is not good for a man to be a minister for the portfolio. She says, “Ministries that work for vulnerable groups such as women, children and senior citizens have not been given priority. They also get less budget. It has become a complimentary title, a way to satisfy all.”But this is not just about now, the ministry has been unstable for about three decades now, which experts believe is evidence of why the state bodies have failed to promote women’s leadership in Nepal. This Ministry of Women was formed in 1995 when Sher Bahadur Deuba was the prime minister. Congress leader Pant says, “It was formed with the aim of advocating and strengthening the presence of women in government bodies, but it could not perform as intended.”The facts also support Pant’s statement. According to the statistics of the Ministry of Women, Children and Senior Citizens, when there are 70 ministers in total, the prime ministers have led this ministry 15 times. PM Dahal has led the ministry four times while other former prime ministers including Deuba headed the ministry four times, Girija Prasad Koirala three times, Surya Bahadur Thapa twice and Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Madhav Kumar Nepal and Baburam Bhattarai have led this ministry once each.Prime ministers leading any ministry indicate a delay in delegating portfolios during cabinet expansions. Lack of delegation makes the prime minister the de facto leader of any empty portfolio(s).If one looks at the 28 years of the ministry’s history, the number of ministers (including 51 ministers, 14 state ministers and five assistant ministers) has reached 70. That means one minister assumed office for five months on average.Another look at the data says that out of the 49 ministers at the Ministry of Women so far, only 13 were women. They were Lila Koirala, Sahana Pradhan, Ashtalakshmi Shakya, Durga Shrestha, Jaipuri Gharti Magar, Riddhi Baba Pradhan, Neelam KC, Asha Koirala, Tham Maya Thapa Magar, Juli Kumari Mahato, Chanda Chaudhary, Uma Regmi and Bhagawati Chaudhary, The rest of the ministers were men. Women, however, are in the majority as state ministers. So far, 11 of the 14 state ministers have been women. In total, there have been 24 women leaders as ministers, state and assistant ministers. This is 35 per cent of the total number of ministers at the Ministry of Women. The number of women ministers in the current cabinet is also low. The 23-member Council of Ministers includes Rekha Sharma (Communications and Information Technology), Ranjita Shrestha (Land Management, Cooperatives and Poverty Alleviation) and Sita Gurung (Urban Development), Sushila Sripaili Thakuri (Culture, Tourism and Civil Aviation/State minister) and Nanda Chapai (Physical Infrastructure and Transport/State minister). The three female ministers in this cabinet make up 13 per cent of the total ministers and add state ministers, it would be 20 per cent.Former minister Jaipuri Gharti Magar says that the fault behind the Ministry of Women’s poor presence and performance lies in the mindset of the leadership. “This ministry was supposed to be for women in leadership. But the ministry could not perform. And with no resources, means and power, it was bound to fail.”Magar adds, “It is not that only women should go to the Ministry of Women, but it is better for a woman to be in the leadership because they will work in the field of women.”“Men were being allotted in this ministry as well, which was meant for women’s leadership. But as their first choice was another ministry, many changed portfolios quicker,” adds Pant, the former state minister of this ministry.Male ministers of state for women, children and senior citizens: Sher Bahadur Deuba, Rameshwar Raya Yadav, Surya Bahadur Thapa, Girija Prasad Koirala, Kul Bahadur Gurung, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Chiranjibi Wagle, Rajendra Kharel, Gore Bahadur Khapangi, Khadga Bahadur Vishwakarma, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, Ram Charan Chaudhary, Madhav Kumar Nepal, Bijay Kumar Gachhadar, Sarva Dev Prasad Ojha, Baburam Bhattarai, Mahendra Prasad Yadav, Badri Prasad Neupane, CP Gajurel, Kumar Khadka, Bikram Bahadur Thapa, Parbat Gurung, Leelanath Shrestha, Mahindra Rai Yadav and Surendra Raj AcharyaMale state ministers: Ram Bachchan Ahir, Arvind Shah and Mohammad Zakir HussainMale assistant ministers: Duryodhan Singh Chaudhary, Naresh Bahadur Singh, Keshab Bahadur Chand and Golche SarkiThis story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.A notice on Shop 509 at Kathmandu Mall in Kathmandu reads, “The shop owner has gone missing since January 15. The owner has 35 days from the date this notice was pasted to empty the space.”The notice was put up there by Diwa Sapana JV, which has been awarded the contract to run the mall by the Employees’ Provident Fund. It told the ward office that it had to do this after the owners of Net Art Studio stopped responding to calls and messages.Ever since the Covid pandemic, the number of people selling and shutting down their shops is increasing although the impact of the pandemic on other parts of public life is minimal. These closed shutters are another indicator of how volatile the country’s economy is at the moment.In the past, such shops and spaces used to be bought and sold for millions. Currently, there are no buyers.Manoj Dhamala, the manager of Arriving Fashion Wear at Sundhara Mall, says business is down and many businesspersons like him are worried about what is going to happen next. He says that he is waiting to sell goods worth Rs 20 million.“There are days I don’t sell anything. I used to sell goods worth Rs 100,000 a day. Now I sit and wait,” says Dhamala. Dhamala says that the business, which slowed down after the pandemic has still not picked up resulting in closed shutters across the capital.“This place is great. We’ve not struggled with footfall, but the recent economic recession has dried up business,” says Hamal.Many shops at Sundhara Mall are empty. A few people go there for beauty-related services, but shops selling clothes, shoes and cosmetics do not have customers.Sangam Bista recently sold his shop in Galkopakha. He says that he is not the only person to have sold his shop adding many closed shutters are empty on the road from Gongabu Chok to Thamel Chok.Even those who are doing business now are wondering if they can survive this. “How can a business survive when no one comes to buy anything?” he says, adding he is planning to leave Nepal for foreign employment in Dubai.He says that many have tried to sell their shops but with no buyers, people have decided to close down completely rather than paying rent.Sanjita Ale, who bought a dairy shop in Kapurdhara two months ago, is feeling the pressure as her daily sales are dwindling as expenses keep on rising.“The person who sold it told me that business is good. But it is nothing as told. I wonder if people have started to cut down dairy consumption,” says Ale.According to Kumar Karki, the chairperson of the Nepal National Federation of Entrepreneurs, so many closed shutters are a major concern as there was a time when it was almost impossible to find empty spaces. But now, the same spaces are vacant as shops are shutting down one after another.To-let boards have started appearing even at buildings at Darbarmarg, where it was near impossible to find closed shutters. Bishwajyoti Mall is a prime example as more than 50 per cent space is vacant.Shops are even shutting down in highly sought-after places like Labim Mall, Civil Mall and CTC Mall. Footfall in these malls has significantly gone down, say shop owners.This is worrying as many shops in these malls had been pre-booked when these malls were being built. With these malls vacant, commercial buildings in places like New Baneshwor are also struggling to find tenants. This shows a reluctance in people to open new businesses at the moment.Naveen Luitel, the chair of the New Baneshwor Business Association, says that 25 to 30 per cent of the shutters are vacant in the Baneshwor area. He says that most businesspersons in the area are planning to sell their shops if the right price is offered.“There was a time when many did not hesitate to pay Rs 100,000 as rent. But now with the recession taking place everywhere in the world, things are tight as many are struggling to pay rent,” says Luitel. “Banks are not handing out loans and cooperatives that support these businesses are struggling too. Times are tough at the moment.”Now, with many closed shutters in New Road, alarm bells are ringing within the business circle as many fear the worst is yet to come.Many shopkeepers also feel that lower footfall is a result of the rise in online shopping.Ram Kumar KC, the ward chair of Kathmandu 10, says the ward office is getting many requests to vacate the shops in the Baneshwor area as shopkeepers are out of contact.“We are getting requests every other day,” says KC.The situation in Lalitpur’s Mangalbazar is no different. According to local businessman Bhim Rajthala, there was a time people would refuse to empty the space even when offered compensation in excess of Rs 1.5 million.“Now people are ready to leave if they get around Rs 500,000. How times have changed,” says Rajthala, adding things are worse than during the two years of the coronavirus pandemic.He says that people are struggling to pay off their loans and struggling to sustain their businesses. What has not helped is the haphazard road construction in the Mangalbazar area. “We are wondering if this is happening due to the expansion of the market even within the new settlements of Lalitpur. But all of us are shocked at how badly business has gone down over the past year,” says Rajthala.But the situation of businesses in new settlements around Kathmandu and Lalitpur is the same. Due to this, the number of closed shutters is increasing. Luitel of the New Baneshwor Trade Association says that the government has to come up with a plan to protect small businesses.With no support and rising inflation, many businesspersons are shutting down businesses and leaving the country. “Policies should be made keeping in mind the problems faced by small businesses. It is clear they are struggling and the government has to do something to help them,” says Luitel.The government is estimating that the effects of the recession seen in the industrial sector are reaching the business sector. The National Statistics Office has predicted that the industry sector will contribute only 5.32 per cent to the gross domestic product (GDP) this year.Due to the decrease in vegetable, mustard, soya bean and sunflower oil production as well as iron and steel production, it is preliminary estimated that the total value-added growth rate in the financial year will go down by 2.04 per cent compared to the last fiscal year.According to the statistics office, due to the decline in imports and domestic industrial products, the growth rate of wholesale and retail trade is also negative. It is estimated that wholesale and retail trade, vehicle and motorcycle repair services contributed 15.39 per cent to the GDP this year.Karki from the Nepal National Federation of Entrepreneurs says, “If the government does not bring policies to protect businesspersons, businesses will continue to shut down, and the closed shutters will put pressure on the government’s revenue.” According to him, the high rate of customs assessment and high cost of goods have caused problems for traders who were shocked due to high-interest rates.“There is no money in the market. Banks are handing out loans,” says Karki. “With no business, it is hard for many to pay rent and with many buried in loans, they feel leaving shops is the best option.”Rajesh Kaji Shrestha, the former president of the Nepal Chamber of Commerce, says that businesses are being closed in the market because of the problems seen in the economy.“It is high time we needed to stop talking about problems and start working towards a solution. The government should do whatever it takes to revive the industry and businesses,” says Shrestha.This story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Protests have long been used as a tool to demand change and hold those in power accountable. However, when it comes to erasing corruption and political influence in the judiciary in Nepal, the power of protests is not so visible. While protests have the potential to raise public awareness and pressure authorities to address judicial corruption, these issues are deeply ingrained and difficult to eliminate. Recently, the Nepal Bar Association staged a protest against the delay in the appointment of the chief justice. Meanwhile, the judiciary in Nepal also faces protests, mainly from the Nepal Bar Association, on recurring issues such as corruption and political influences. But have they made any impact yet? Throughout history, protests have brought about significant social and political change. From the civil rights movement in the United States to the Arab Spring in the Middle East, protests have been a powerful force for promoting democracy, human rights, and social justice. In the context of judicial corruption and political influence, protests can raise public awareness about these issues and put pressure on authorities to take action. This pressure can be particularly effective when it is sustained and backed by a broad coalition of civil society groups and other stakeholders. In 2015, a massive earthquake struck Nepal, causing widespread devastation and exposing widespread corruption in the distribution of relief funds. Civil society groups organised protests and public campaigns calling for an independent investigation into corruption and for the judiciary in Nepal to hold those responsible accountable. As a result of these protests, the Supreme Court ordered the government to investigate and punish those responsible for the corruption. In 2020, Nepali civil society groups organised protests and public campaigns calling for judicial reform and accountability, and for the establishment of an independent judicial commission to oversee the appointment, promotion, and disciplinary action of judges. The protests led to the formation of a judicial commission, which has the power to investigate and discipline judges accused of misconduct or corruption. There are more successful examples of protests reforming the judiciary in Nepal. Despite the potential of protests to raise awareness and pressure authorities to address judicial corruption, erasing this problem is much easier said than done. Corruption and political influence are deeply ingrained and systemic issues in the judiciary in Nepal that require more than just public pressure to eliminate. In many cases, they are the result of a lack of judicial independence, a weak legal framework, and a culture of impunity that allows those in power to act with impunity. Addressing these issues requires more than just protest movements, but also legal reforms, institutional changes, and strengthening the independence and accountability of the judiciary. A major way to erase corruption from the judiciary in Nepal is to make the appointment process of constitutional organs free of political influence. To combat judicial corruption, countries also need to take specific steps such as strengthening judicial independence, improving transparency and accountability, building public trust, and implementing anti-corruption measures such as codes of conduct and whistleblower protections.While protests have the potential to put pressure on authorities to address corruption and political influence in the judiciary in Nepal, their effectiveness is not guaranteed. The success of protest movements depends on a range of factors, including the level of public support, the strength of civil society organisations, the ability to leverage media attention, and the willingness of authorities to listen to the demands of protesters. In some cases, protests have been successful in promoting judicial reform and accountability, as in the case of Brazil’s Car Wash investigation. In other cases, protests have failed to bring about change or even resulted in a backlash against activists and civil society groups. Protests do not guarantee that it is always possible to reform the system, yet they can be a part of a bigger reform process which also includes the role of media and other stakeholders. Yet, the action taken by the Nepal Bar Association is perfect now as it creates pressure for the government to make a decision about the appointment of the chief justice, the head of the judiciary in Nepal, faster.In addition to protests, international organisations and media coverage can play a role in promoting independence and combatting corruption in the judiciary in Nepal. International organisations can provide technical assistance and promote best practices while media coverage can raise awareness and put pressure on authorities to take action. Media coverage can bring attention to corrupt practices within the judiciary and help to expose cases of judicial misconduct and corruption. Investigative journalism can also help uncover systemic issues and hold those responsible accountable. For example, in Brazil, Operation Car Wash was a media-led investigation into corruption at the highest levels of government and business, which resulted in the prosecution of numerous politicians and businesspeople. International organisations such as the United Nations and the World Bank can provide support and guidance to countries seeking to combat judicial corruption. They can provide technical assistance, training and best practices to help countries strengthen their judicial systems and root out corrupt practices. For example, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has developed tools and guidance to help countries prevent and address judicial corruption.In conclusion, the potential impact of protests on corruption and political influence in the judiciary in Nepal is complex and multifaceted. While they can be a powerful tool for raising public awareness and putting pressure on authorities, they are not a panacea for erasing these systemic issues. To truly address these problems, legal reforms, institutional changes, and strengthening the independence and accountability of the judiciary are necessary. Nepal has a big market for Bollywood and any Bollywood celebrities coming to this small country is big news. The same happened earlier this week as star Amir Khan landed in Kathmandu, reportedly for a 10-day Vipassana meditation camp.As Khan’s Nepali fans were happy about him coming to Kathmandu, the news left many of them wondering what this Vipassana is all about. So to quench your curiosity, here we explain the idea and its growing popularity in Nepal.Vipassana is a technique of meditation. It is claimed to be one of the oldest types of meditation and is often related to the teachings of Gautam Buddha. Although it is frequently taught in the context of Buddhism, meditation is not affiliated with any religious or spiritual tradition. It has grown in popularity across the world as a secular practice in which individuals of all backgrounds and faiths can participate.Vipassana or ‘vi’ ‘passana’ means a special insight or clear sight in the ancient Pali language. In Vipassana meditation, practitioners typically focus their attention on their breath, bodily sensations, or other objects of awareness. The goal is to cultivate mindfulness and develop a deep understanding of the impermanence, dissatisfaction and the nature of existence. So, it can be understood that the practice of Vipassana meditation aims to develop insight by observing something, with heightened awareness, especially in life or the present moment, without judgment or attachment.Anyone wanting to be enrolled in Vipassana and get the experience can reach out to:Vipassana meditation is often taught in retreat settings, where participants dedicate a period, ranging from a few days to several weeks, to intensive practice. These retreats typically involve periods of silent meditation, guided instructions and group discussions to support the participants’ progress.The practice of Vipassana meditation typically involves: Though it is open and designed for all, the experience and benefits of meditation can vary from person to person and at different levels. But here are some expected results.In other words, such transformative practice can lead to personal growth and positive behavioural changes. One may experience shifts in attitudes, values, and habits, leading to personal growth, increased well-being, and a more meaningful and purposeful life.Vipassana courses are available in a variety of lengths, formats and levels of intensity. Depending on the Vipassana organisation or tradition, the particular offers may differ. Here are some examples of popular Vipassana courses:Nepal has a big market for Bollywood and any Bollywood celebrities coming to this small country is big news. The same happened earlier this week as star Amir Khan landed in Kathmandu, reportedly for a 10-day Vipassana meditation camp.As Khan’s Nepali fans were happy about him coming to Kathmandu, the news left many of them wondering what this Vipassana is all about. So to quench your curiosity, here we explain the idea and its growing popularity in Nepal.Vipassana is a technique of meditation. It is claimed to be one of the oldest types of meditation and is often related to the teachings of Gautam Buddha. Although it is frequently taught in the context of Buddhism, meditation is not affiliated with any religious or spiritual tradition. It has grown in popularity across the world as a secular practice in which individuals of all backgrounds and faiths can participate.Vipassana or ‘vi’ ‘passana’ means a special insight or clear sight in the ancient Pali language. In Vipassana meditation, practitioners typically focus their attention on their breath, bodily sensations, or other objects of awareness. The goal is to cultivate mindfulness and develop a deep understanding of the impermanence, dissatisfaction and the nature of existence. So, it can be understood that the practice of Vipassana meditation aims to develop insight by observing something, with heightened awareness, especially in life or the present moment, without judgment or attachment.Anyone wanting to be enrolled in Vipassana and get the experience can reach out to:Vipassana meditation is often taught in retreat settings, where participants dedicate a period, ranging from a few days to several weeks, to intensive practice. These retreats typically involve periods of silent meditation, guided instructions and group discussions to support the participants’ progress.The practice of Vipassana meditation typically involves: Though it is open and designed for all, the experience and benefits of meditation can vary from person to person and at different levels. But here are some expected results.In other words, such transformative practice can lead to personal growth and positive behavioural changes. One may experience shifts in attitudes, values, and habits, leading to personal growth, increased well-being, and a more meaningful and purposeful life.Vipassana courses are available in a variety of lengths, formats and levels of intensity. Depending on the Vipassana organisation or tradition, the particular offers may differ. Here are some examples of popular Vipassana courses:The Newa community, the natives of the Kathmandu valley, is known for its festivals and jatras. But this community is equally rich in food and culinary style too. Almost every month, there is a fest in a Newa neighbourhood for the purpose of getting together with family members, relatives and friends. The Newa people have their own culture of eating, which distinguishes them from others. Suku bhwoe is one kind of feast and dining culture in which attendees eat by sitting on a sukul, a carpet made up of hay. However, this kind of feast is losing its charm these days as the sukul is being replaced by chairs and tables. But why?Cultural expert Om Dhaubhadel says the suku bhwoe culture is getting unpopular due to a busy lifestyle and modernity. “People from the Newa community used to enjoy this feast where the host would serve a variety of dishes to the attendees who sat closely on a sukul.”  He says that people have become too busy these days that they do not have time for such time-consuming arrangements. It applies in the case of both organisers and the attendees. In the suku bhwoe system, the food is served serially and one cannot leave the feast until the entire food arrives. He says, “Just like in a party palace, we cannot leave suku bhwoe by just eating what we like. It is not a buffet system.”  The other thing that makes suku bhwoe uncomfortable is modern-day attire. It is difficult to sit cross-legged on the floor wearing a modern dress. Sitting on a sukul by wearing a skirt, pants, half-pants and lehenga is uncomfortable. “This is also a reason for the declining charm of suku bhwoe,” says Dhaubhadel. According to him, the importance of sukul bhwoe has not been explained to the younger generation. The young generation considers it a hassle to arrange it, leading to a sharp decline. Here are some interesting details about suku bhwoe. In the Newa community, it is conducted during auspicious occasions such as rice feeding ceremonies, suryadarshans, bratabandhas, weddings, wedding anniversaries, ratharohans and guthi events. Likewise, it is also conducted after the death ritual. “It used to take place during all the jatras and festivals, but now it is conducted only in guthi events and death rituals,” says Dhaubadel. Some of the popular cuisines served during a suku bhwoe are chiura (beaten rice), leafy greens, garlic, buffalo curry, and different beans that include kerau (pea), chana (gram), simi (black eye pea), and simpu (cannellini beans). The other dishes are cauliflower, potato, chhyala (soup with bamboo shoots), spinach, bhutan (fried organ meat) and jujudhau (curd). The feast ends with a serving of radishes, carrots and some pieces of fruits as a salad. According to Dhaubadel, the exact date when this culture began is not confirmed. He assumes that the Newa community conceptualised it while developing their culture and civilisation. This story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Nepal marks National Law Day on Baishakh 26 every year as per the Nepali calendar to commemorate the issuance of the law to govern Nepal’s judicial system in 2009 BS (May 8, 1952), considering it as a milestone in the development of law in Nepal. Different law-related organisations all over the country are celebrating the day in various ways. Law is something that binds people under the rules and regulations. A country without the law is unimaginable. In modern society, the law has been a part of human life as they say ignorance of the law is no excuse. So, on the occasion of National Law Day, let’s review the development of law in Nepal so far. Talking about Nepal’s legal system, it has a long history and in all these years, it has witnessed changes galore. Here are some of the major changes that have shaped the development of law in Nepal’s history. The history of the development of law in Nepal dates back to over 2,000 years ago. The formal discussion on the legal system began during the Kirant dynasty (early 307 BC), the first ruling dynasty of Nepal. During that time, there were four tribunals: Kuther, Sulli, Ligwal and Mapchok. Back then, the primary source of law was Mundum, the religious scripture of Kirant. Mainly, in Mundum, there were rules regarding birth, death, marriage and property. Likewise, theft, robbery and murder were considered crimes. During this period inter-caste marriage was unacceptable. The king used to be the ultimate body to provide justice to the public. The king used to appoint specific people to formulate laws. Despite spending most of the time in unification, King Prithivi Narayan Shah also made a notable contribution to the development of law in Nepal. The judicial administration of the country became systematic during his reign.A kachahari (court) was set up in each district, which used to be operated by officials with the titles of Dittha, Bichari and Pandit. They worked together with the district administrator, called amali, to adjudicate cases. With that, Shah also abolished almost all previous courts and established many courts. It is found that the law back then was based on Yajnavalkya Smriti, a Hindu religious text. The Rana regime is also a significant phase in the development of Nepal’s legal system. In 1853, the first Muluki Ain, also known as the first written law of the country, was formulated under the reign of Surendra Bikram Shah. It codified all laws of Nepal – civil and criminal, including religious and customary.The Muluki Ain, perhaps one of the greatest milestones in the development of law in Nepal, exempted Brahmins and women from capital punishment; instead, they were subject to “damal”, life imprisonment with confiscation of property and other legal consequences, upon conviction of capital crimes. Late kings, Tribhuvan Bir Bikram Shah Dev and Mahendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev, made remarkable contributions to the development of law in Nepal. King Tribhuvan introduced laws that made the judiciary independent and established the Pradhan Nayalaya (the Supreme Court) as the highest and final court of the land. He later revised this by commanding that the highest court should revise its own decisions according to law, as and when necessary, under established procedures.Extensive legal and judicial reforms were, however, carried out during the reign of King Mahendra, which significantly impacted Nepal’s legal system.He was the first Nepali monarch to introduce a constitution as the fundamental law of the nation. Under his reign, the previous Muluki Ain was replaced with a new one that emphasised the principle of equality before the law and abolished the consideration of caste and religion in practising law.  So far Nepal has seven constitutions, which are considered the laws of all other laws. They are the Government of Nepal Act issued in 1948, the Interim Government of Nepal Act issued in 1951, the Constitution of the Kingdom of Nepal issued in 1959, the Constitution of Nepal issued in 1962, the Constitution of the Kingdom of Nepal issued in 1990, the Interim Constitution of Nepal issued in 2007 and the Constitution of Nepal issued in 2015. On September 20, 2015, an elected Constituent Assembly promulgated the latest constitution of Nepal, which remains in effect to this day.The coronation of British King Charles III is scheduled to be held this Saturday at Westminster Abbey. Charles acceded to the throne in September 2022 after the death of his mother, Queen Elizabeth II. Dignitaries from several countries will be attending the much-awaited event of the British royal family on Saturday. Nepal has sent its foreign minister Narayan Prakash Saud will be participating in the ceremony on behalf of President Ram Chandra Paudel, who is currently recovering from health issues. But should Nepal care about this big event?The Kingdom of Great Britain (the United Kingdom) and Nepal have been friendly allies for nearly two centuries now. The UK is one of the top development partners of Nepal. Tourism, trade, health, education and the British Gurkha remain the key dimensions of bilateral relations between these two countries. Overall, the British royal family has very close ties with Nepal. Some of the significant areas of this connection are explained below.The United Kingdom is the first ever nation in the world with which Nepal has had strong diplomatic relations for years. On March 4, 1816, the treaty of Sugauli was signed between the East India Company and the Kingdom of Nepal, which further established intrinsic trade relations between Nepal and Britain and the British royal family.Later in 1923, Nepal and Britain signed a treaty of friendship that recognised Nepal as an independent and sovereign nation. The treaty also mentioned that both countries would maintain peace and mutual friendship. Moreover, the United Kingdom ruled by the British royal family is also the first country in the world to establish its embassy in Kathmandu. And Nepal established its first diplomatic legation in London in 1934, which was Nepal’s first diplomatic mission, it was further elevated to the ambassador level in 1947. The new King Charles III, as the prince, along with several other dignitaries participated in the coronation ceremony of King Birendra in 1975. Later, in 1980, he paid another official visit to Nepal.According to a BBC report, Prince Charles III was in Nepal again in 1998, during which he visited Maiti Nepal, a leading NGO taking care of human trafficking survivors. The NGO founder Anuradha Koirala has told BBC that the prince later sent GBP 78,000 by selling his paintings, highlighting the British royal family is closely connected to Nepal. Queen Elizabeth II along with Prince Phillip visited Nepal in 1961 shortly after King Mahendra’s coup, in which he dissolved Nepal’s first-ever democratically elected parliament and ruled as a monarch. During the high-profile visit of British royal family members, the queen mostly paid homage to all the British Gurkha veterans who served in World War I and II.  In 1986, Queen Elizabeth II interacted with 200 British Gurkha soldiers, amongst them were seven surviving soldiers who had been awarded the Victoria Cross. The monarch also expressed immense gratitude during her reign for the services provided by the British Gurkhas, making Nepal close to the British royal family. Nepal’s Prime Minister Jung Bahadur Rana visited the British royal family in 1850. He was the first prime minister of Nepal to visit Great Britain. During his trip, he met Queen Victoria at St James’s Palace and even received the guard of honour. Several kings and princes from the British royal family visited Nepal to indulge themselves in hunting. In December 1911, King George V took part in a hunt that was organised by the prime minister of Nepal. Such hunting trips were organised in order to strengthen the relationships between the two countries.Princess Diana of Wales, another key member of the British royal family then, paid an official visit to Nepal in March 1993, as a patron of the British Red Cross Youth and Leprosy Mission. The princess showed concern and support for the unprivileged ones and interacted with them during her visit.As per public knowledge, Prince Harry is the most recent British royal family member to have visited Nepal. Prince Harry visited Nepal in 2016, a year after the massive earthquake. He paid tribute to all the survivors of the terrible disaster and even appreciated the resilience shown by Nepali people during such difficult times. He also visited the UNESCO cultural sites destroyed by the earthquake and expressed immense gratitude towards the Gurkhas and praised their bravery and commitment over the past 200 years.As one of the greatest allies of Britain, Nepali soldiers fought valiantly in both world wars and sacrificed their lives on several battlefields of the world. Thus, this has enhanced the deep heritage and friendship between Nepal and Great Britain as well as the British royal family. In fact, recruitment of the Gurkha soldiers in the British Army began in 1815 and continues to date.More remarkably, Prince Charles III himself took over the role of the colonel chief of the royal Gurkha rifles in 1977. Then, Queen Elizabeth II attended a parade in 2015  in London to celebrate the 200th anniversary of Gurkha service in the British Army.A royal Gurkha regiment contingent was invited to take part in the wedding ceremony of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle in 2018. Overall, although Nepal is no longer a monarchy and became a democratic republic on May 28, 2008, the British royal family is still closely linked with Nepal as it was for the past two centuries. Both countries are making efforts together to enhance their friendship and to provide assistance to each other in further development. This article has been updated to highlight Prince Charles III’s Nepal visits.As the spring season reaches its peak in Kathmandu, major roads in the city turn purple. Beautiful flowers from big plants blanket tarred roads and busy sidewalks—just to get crushed by speeding tyres and hastening feet after a while. But, if you catch the scene before the blooms are trodden by the vehicles and people, you will feel blissful for a moment.Perhaps there are a few hundred people in Kathmandu who have not seen jacaranda flowers. Maybe, the number of people who recognise it as jacaranda is even lower. Apparently, numerous posts on social media around this time every year suggest that thousands of Kathmanduites mistake this foreign plant for their native ‘shirish’ (mimosa).Jacaranda undoubtedly is not native to Nepal. So where did it come from? How and why is it so popular in Kathmandu that locals mistake it for some other plants? Why are people confused about shirish and jacaranda, and why native shirishes are less common here than alien jacaranda? These interesting questions do not have easy answers.In an attempt to find answers to these curiosities, it seems jacaranda is an exotic lover of Kathmandu, which has contributed to the city’s beauty but still posed threats to it.Owing to the characteristics of the plant, botanists agree that jacaranda (Jacaranda mimosifolia) is native to South America (Brazil, Mexico and Argentina). The plant is common in many Asian, African and European countries these days.Nepali botanists and historians suggest that Rana aristocrats brought this plant to Kathmandu in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. There are, however, different claims about who actually bought it and why they were attracted to this foreign flower while their own country was full of exotic flora.Historian Saurabh, who also has a wide range of knowledge about plants in Nepal, says that Sur Shamsher Rana, a member of former Prime Minister Bir Shamsher’s family, brought the plant to Nepal in the 1920s from Darjeeling or any hilly area of India. He planted the flower in his private garden, near the place where Hotel Yak and Yeti was established later, in Darbarmarg, and this was the first jacaranda plant in Nepal. The author in his controversial book Asahamati further writes that it was King Tribhuvan who gave life to the second jacaranda plant in Kathmandu. He planted the flower in front of the southern gate of the Narayanhiti Palace, across from Jai Nepal cinema hall today.On the other hand, Tirtha Bahadur Shrestha, whom contemporary Nepali botanists refer to as the leader of the first generation plant scientists of the country, believes that it has already been around 150 years since the plant was first brought to Nepal. However, he also agrees that members of the Rana family were behind the import. “It is difficult to figure out the exact date of the import,” he says, suggesting it must be in the mid or late 19th century. He shares, “The plant first came to Ranas’ gardens and few plants came to the streets later. Jacaranda became common in Kathmandu when the government itself planted the flowers around Tundikhel ground in the 70s.”Many people, including Saurabh, believe that the flowers were planted across the city in 1961 when Queen Elizabeth II visited Nepal. Shrestha does not agree with the claim saying there were only a few jacaranda flowers in Kathmandu then.But Saurabh believes the road around Tundikhel itself was constructed before the Queen’s trip and jacaranda, among other plants, was planted at the same time.The history of confusion between jacaranda and shirish is as old as the growth of jacaranda in the city.Of course, there are similarities between the plants as they both are members of the mimosa or albizia family. Shrestha says the compound leaves of the two plants look alike; hence botanists have registered them in the same family.In the albizia family, shirish (loosely translated as mimosa in English) is the chief type. The shirish itself has dozens of variants and eight of them are available in Nepal, Shrestha informs, adding they do not have separate names in Nepali, but are known for their colours (kalo shirish, rato shirish, seto shirish).The botanist, however, sees no point in comparing shirish and jacaranda. Jacaranda, at least the one that is in Kathmandu, has a peculiar purple colour whereas shirish of such colour has been never been found in Nepal.Shrestha ‘blames’ noted novelist Parijat for creating the confusion. Parijat, in her masterpiece Shirishko Phool, identifies jacaranda for shirish, according to him. “Parijat spent her childhood in Darjeeling where there were many shirish plants. Then she came to Kathmandu and thought jacaranda was also a kind of shirish as they had similar leaves,” Shrestha claims, “She then asked essayist Shankar Lamichhane to write an introduction to her novel. Lamichhane did not know what a shirish flower looked like. He asked officials of the then Department of Plant Resources and they told him that the shirish was a synonym for jacaranda.”Saurabh in his article, however, refutes Shrestha’s claim about the ignorance and innocence of Parijat and Lamichhane. He does not categorically explain how the confusion surfaced.Shrestha explains that difficulty in cultivating native shirish is also one of the major reasons for the confusion. Whereas jacaranda can grow on its own without human care and attention, shirish is a garden plant that demands a lot of effort to cultivate. “That is why it is easier for people to perceive jacaranda as shirish rather than sweating over the shirish itself.”“Our psychological tendency of ignoring things which are already available around us and valuing new things is also a part of the confusion,” he adds, “Otherwise, there are many benefits of shirish. They contribute to nitrogen-fixing in the soil and make it more fertile. It also has medicinal values.”The confusion between shirish and jacaranda has forced both the plants to lose their identity. Whereas only a few Kathmanduites recognise shirish, which is native to their own land and which has a revered position in some of greatest Sanskrit epics by Mahakavi Kalidas, failing to recognise jacaranda itself is also a problem from the botanical perspective.Gardeners working for Ranas did not know which flower it was; therefore they gave their own name to jacaranda, according to Shrestha. “Most of the gardeners were Newars of Kathmandu and they called it ‘chakhunba swan’, which literally translates to ‘sparrow flower’ because a fallen jacaranda flower looks like a sparrow in its shape when you pick it up from the ground and put it on your palm.”Botanists believe that it is wrong to translate the names of plants and species into new languages because their names carry detailed information about the origins and development of the plant and its characteristics.“‘What’s in a name’ is a different philosophy with its own value, but in botany, names hold importance and any plant has to be named correctly,” Shrestha says, suggesting translating shirish as mimosa and jacaranda as ‘nilo (blue) shirish’ or ‘chakhuncha swan’ is wrong for they pose threats to their identity as well as the botanical knowledge so far achieved about the plants.“If jacaranda was not named jacaranda, you could not trace it to South America and see how it moved to other places of the world.”In the past four decades, the spread of jacaranda has been steady in Kathmandu. Whereas its contribution to the aesthetics of the city is appreciable, environmental scientists fear that the uncontrolled growth of such plants may pose threats to native plants and other aspects of the environment.“Jacaranda grows fast; it takes only a few years to grow up. On the other hand, it can grow in any kind of soil,” Yadav Upreti, environment scientist at the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Nepal office, informs, “Therefore, the plant will  spread more in the Kathmandu Valley if we do not do anything.” His tone suggests that some initiatives have to be taken to control the spread.Shrestha adds that a changing Kathmandu also has a role in its speedy growth. “Around four decades ago, there were fewer people in Kathmandu, and you could see mists and dewdrops in the morning. Now, with the growth in the number of people and vehicles, the temperature in the city has significantly gone up; subsequently, you rarely find dewdrops on the ground,” he explains, “Kathmandu in its original state was not an appropriate place for South American plants like jacaranda. However, recent changes are making it a favourable one.”That is why there are some jacaranda plants in dense forests of the Valley like the one at Swayambhunath these days, according to Shrestha. Though it looks quite beautiful to see purple flowers blossoming in green forests, they might result in the extinction of local plants, he warns.Therefore, Shrestha suggests concerned authorities launch a study about the invasive nature of jacaranda and its impact on local plants—because no such research has been conducted in Nepal ever. Its growth can be ‘managed’, not ‘controlled’, while still embracing the beauty it adds to the city.From the archiveAs the monsoon season looms, this year’s weather forecast says most regions will likely have below-average rainfall. On May 4, the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology released its weather outlook for the monsoon season (June-September 2023). According to the report, most regions, with the exception of a few areas in the eastern hills and Terai, will have a 35-55 per cent likelihood of below-average rainfall. Additionally, the outlook predicts higher maximum and minimum temperatures during the season, which strongly suggests a hot and dry monsoon.Hydrologist Sudarsan Humagain says the monsoon brings 1472mm of rain to the country on average while the temperature ranges from 29.4 to 21 degrees Celsius. The monsoon season accounts for almost 80 per cent of the total rainfall for the year, according to the New York Times. During the four-month monsoon season, a certain location receives enough rainwater to fill 1.5 water bottles on average. However, the weather forecast indicates that some regions–such as Gandaki, Karnali and Sudurpaschim provinces and the flatland of Koshi–may have warmer temperatures but less rainfall than usual. “These areas may face drought and above normal heat during the monsoon,” Humagain says.So does a dry monsoon mean a season free of natural hazards? Experts say it is not.  While it may be tempting to assume that a forecasted dry monsoon season means lower hazards, the reality is quite different. The Department of Hydrology and Meteorology warns of a high risk of flash floods, landslides, and other monsoon-related hazards that could cause disasters. This is due to the inaccuracy of seasonal forecasts in predicting the likelihood and distribution of rainfall.Binod Pokharel, an associate professor at Tribhuvan University’s Central Department of Hydrology and Meteorology, says weather events are becoming more intense, extreme, and unpredictable. Unpredictable extreme weather events that have caused both economic and human losses in recent years have provided compelling evidence of this trend.“Intense rainfall within a short period in a certain area can lead to hazards such as flash floods, mudslides in hilly areas, and landslides,” he says.Although technological advancements have significantly enhanced the understanding of weather patterns, long-term forecasts cannot always precisely predict the timing or location of heavy rainfall. To avoid any potential dangers, the authorities advise people to stay alert and take the appropriate precautions throughout the monsoon season even though it is a dry monsoon. Community-based early warning systems can be an efficient alarm system for communities that are at risk. The Nepal government has collaborated with both national and international organisations, including ICIMOD, to improve early warning systems. The monsoon season last year served as a warning that tragedy might strike without warning, even when forecasts are available. Even though above-average rainfall was predicted, areas like Narainapur in Banke experienced almost no rain during the middle of the monsoon, resulting in drought conditions. Anil Pokharel, the head of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority (NDRRMA), warns that a flash drought during the middle of the monsoon this year may add to the pressure already there regardless of the dry monsoon forecast.Long-term or seasonal forecasts cannot reliably predict impending calamities, experts say. However, Pokharel suggests preparing for unexpected droughts during the monsoon season in addition to floods and landslides based on historical experience and current forecasts. “We need to be prepared not only for floods but also for a possible drought, which may affect paddy plantations,” he says. Pokharel, the associate professor who regularly observes weather patterns, explains that different weather systems suggest a high chance of below-average rainfall in June and July. It is, however, hard to determine with precision when and for how long it will rain during the dry monsoon season. “Looking at recent events, intense rain within a few hours is seen as a pattern and this kind of precipitation may occur again, which will be more disaster-prone,” Pokharel says. Ram Niwas Yadav, a farmer of Narainapur-5 of the Banke district, says, “I am worried that this monsoon may destroy our livelihood like the winter and monsoon drought from last year and the flood from the previous years during paddy harvesting season did.” In Narainapur, paddy plantations were impacted by drought last year to the tune of 80 per cent.  The so-called El Nino weather trend is anticipated to have an impact on the approaching monsoon season in South Asia including Nepal. The World Weather Organisation (WMO) has warned that there is a 60 per cent possibility that El Nino will cause dryness and increase heat in many parts of the world over the next three months. The WMO has placed India along with Nepal as the regions affected by impending drought. El Nino is a weather condition in which the surface water temperature of the eastern Pacific Ocean is unusually warm and the air above the surface is also warm, disrupting the regular weather system.The impact of below-normal rainfall in the dry monsoon and high temperatures on agriculture and livelihoods can be tremendous, according to Anil Pokharel. It can also increase the risk of communicable diseases, such as dengue, which saw over 50,000 cases recorded last year in Nepal. “We need to prepare for possible public health risks,” Pokharel says, “We must be prepared for both the regular disasters and the worst-case situation for public health.”Officials of the Epidemiology and Disease Control Division (EDCD) say the agency is gearing up to tackle a potential dengue outbreak. According to Dr Gokarna Dahal, the agency’s Vector-borne Disease Control Section Chief, the EDCD is collaborating with various public health sectors to control the spread of dengue, given the high number of reported cases last year. “To effectively manage a potential dengue outbreak, everyone must play a crucial role, and it is essential to exercise caution when it comes to mosquito bites,” he says.This story first appeared on Nepal Check and Onlinekhabar is republishing it under the Creative Commons licence.The Kathmandu valley’s soil is considered among the most fertile in Nepal. It is believed that the valley was once a large lake, and because of that, the land is said to be the best for agriculture. According to a former agriculture secretary, agriculture was once the main source of income for Kathmandu residents. Apart from the main city areas such as Kirtipur, Patan, Basantpur and Bhaktapur, all the areas here had ample arable land. For agricultural purposes, rajkulos (royal canals) were built, which can still be seen in some areas.But, gradually, the settlements increased the agricultural areas of Kathmandu decreased while the rulers of modern Kathmandu are not prioritising the protection of arable land here. And, today, as per the government records, there is no arable land in the valley although there is still some land where vegetables and fruits are being cultivated.The Land Use Policy was introduced only in June 2022, which made the allocation of land used for different purposes such as agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial, mining and mineral, forest, river, lake, wetland or public use or land with cultural and archaeological importance areas and other designated by the government.In addition, the policy also said that the land could not be plotted unless it is categorised as land for non-agricultural purposes and agricultural purposes. It impacted the purchase and sale of land, hence, the local governments started doing their homework to plot the land on their own. But most of the local governments in the valley have already declared that there is no arable land left in the area. The valley is also seeing a risk that there will be no land left for agriculture in Kathmandu after a few years as the land is not used as per the land use regulations. In Kathmandu, 10 municipalities have declared that there is no arable land in the city whereas the Tokha municipality has yet to finalise the classification of three wards numbered 1, 2 and 3. Mayor Prakash Adhikari says that other areas have been declared as non-agricultural areas. Only the Dakshinkali municipality of Kathmandu has declared its agricultural land along with the Changunarayan and Suryabinayak municipalities of Bhaktapur.The Lalitpur metropolitan city has also listed areas like Khokana and Harsiddha as non-agricultural land whereas Godawari and Mahalakshmi municipalities have also declared all their land as non-agricultural areas.Many of the 753 local governments are afraid of tagging arable land for agricultural purposes. According to the Department of Land Management and Archive, only 158 local governments have separated agricultural and non-agricultural land so far. But the decision to classify land in this way has also raised questions about their reliability and transparency.Dakshinkali has announced that 40 per cent of its land is arable. Deputy Mayor Basanti Tamang says that they have declared the arable land as per the discussion among the locals. She adds, “After we started the discussion, some people started spreading rumours, but there are more areas we can declare as agricultural land and we were in favour to do that.”All four municipalities of Bhaktapur–Bhaktapur, Changunarayan, Madhyapur Thimi and Suryabinayak–have also finalised their land categories. Suryabinayak and Changunarayan municipalities have set aside 5-7 per cent as arable land. The Bhaktapur Land Revenue Office chief Lok Bahadur Bhandari says that Madhyapur Thimi and Bhaktapur municipalities have classified all of their land as non-agricultural areas. “The urbanised areas naturally turn into residential areas. But if everyone wants their land to be tagged as residential, why would the government announce it as an agricultural area,” he questions.Because of the all-around pressure, most governments did not do enough homework to allocate arable land. “Stating there is no agricultural land, all the land has been declared as non-agricultural land, which will surely be used for other purposes in the future.”In the regulations, there is a rule that the land allocated as the agricultural area cannot be used for plotting if the area is less than 500 square metres in the Kathmandu valley, 675 square metres in Terai and inner Madhesh and less than 1,000 square metres in other areas. The land mafia also played a role here. “Businesspeople and land mafia also spread the message that if the land is declared arable, the land will be locked and not allowed to sell,” says a leading administrative officer working in the valley. They add that local representatives also acted to favour of the profit, and so much land has been deemed non-arable that the regulation might fail.Godawari Mayor Gajendra Maharjan says that the federal government has introduced a system that cannot be implemented. Gokarneshwar Chief Administrative Officer Baikuntha Prasad Sapkota says that the declaration of unused agricultural land as such led to agitation among locals, and some even took up the khukuri to threaten the authorities.Tarakeshwar municipality spokesperson Radha Krishna Khadgi says that though the local government has asked for applications from the locals to declare the agricultural zone, it has not got any, meaning they are not interested.The three rural municipalities of Lalitpur–Konjyosom, Bagmati and Mahankal–have determined arable land within their area. However, the head of the Gotikhel Land Revenue Office, Suvarna Bajracharya, says that such land is available only in a very small amount. He says, “It is said that land up to 200 metres from the main road and 50 metres to narrower roads should be residential. But there is not much land untouched by road, is there?”Budhanilkantha municipality administrative officer Kedar Bahadur Khadka says that saying there is no arable land does not necessarily mean there is no arable land at all. “Though there are no large arable land areas within the city, house gardens or rooftop gardens are there.”A former agriculture secretary says the local governments made mistakes with concerns that the value of the land would decrease or they would be unable to get a large bank loan as a mortgage by declaring it as agricultural land. He believes that such a decision was favoured because of the tax amount. “The integrated property tax on agricultural land is not so high, but the tax of the residential area is high.” Having said that, the official believes that if there are still large, unused arable land pieces, and if they can be saved, the valley will benefit. “By increasing the facilities or subsidies for the owners, the government can preserve them.”Former minister Shashi Shrestha remembers that the regulations were brought after a lot of struggle to save arable land. It was made to develop a self-sufficient economy by increasing production and productivity through cooperatives, encouraging proper management and utilisation of land. Shrestha stresses the need to protect arable land. “No matter how successful we are, no matter how rich we are, we cannot eat money. Even if you live in a palace, you cannot eat gold and silver, you need food and for that, we need to save arable land.”Economist Keshav Acharya highlights, “After the government builds a road, the value of the land costing Rs 10,000 becomes worthy of Rs 1 million overnight. The private sector has taken billions and invested in the land and capital market. They are profiting by increasing the price of land without any effort.”But he objects that the federal government is trying to change the regulations when the local governments are still facing problems in land classification due to the locals refusing to list their land as arable land. Acharya says that land management can give one long-term solution to economic problems. “The regulations should be strictly implemented to create an investment environment in the country.”“Who will benefit from the encouragement of the trend in which one invests Rs 10 million in real estate, selling it for Rs 15 million after six months, while the other sells it for Rs 30 million in the next year? How will the country develop?” asks Acharya.Former secretary Gopinath Mainali says that the federal government and local governments should not fail to look at the potential, availability and use of land. “If we boycott the law and start to implement it in a normal way, land management will not be implemented properly. And that means there is a situation that will go back in time and policy is rendered useless.”This story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Chitwan, May 11Two rhino calves have been found dead in different sectors of the Chitwan National Park, the biggest natural habitat of one-horned rhinoceros in Nepal.A female calf, approximately four months old, was found dead in the Tamor Tal Kasara sector of the park on Tuesday, informs the park. On Wednesday, a male calf estimated to be 2.5 years old was found dead in the Saraha sector. The park says both are cases of natural death as their horns and hooves are not stolen.With the deaths of these rhino calves, the number of rhinoceros dying in the Chitwan National Park and its buffer zones in this fiscal year that began in mid-July 2022 has reached 18. Of them, at least three are poached.According to the 2021 census, there are 752 rhinos in all over Nepal with 694 in Chitwan alone.Kathmandu, May 16After a year of bureaucratic hassle, Yatri Motorcycles has become the first made-in-Nepal motorbike to get a registration number.This is a historic moment in Nepal as this is the first time a bike has been given a registration number by the Department of Transport Management without an import invoice.“We are forever grateful to our users and everyone who supported us in this journey so far,” says the company.The company has also expressed gratitude to the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and Transport, the Department of Transport Management and all those who helped the made-in-Nepal motorbikes get official government recognition.According to the department, the Transport Management Standard Operating Procedure and Directives was amended on April 27 to pave the way to register made-in-Nepal vehicles based on a VAT bill and excise duty clearance form.Earlier, Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal directed concerned officials to address concerns over the absence of provision of registering motor vehicles manufactured within the country.French company Citroën has brought its compact SUV, Citroën C3, to Nepal. With funky orange accents and aggressive styling, the SUV’s looks are sure to bring road attention. The car is made in India and has won the 2023 World Urban Car Award. The car, with the features it offers in the budget car price range, has already pulled many people towards it there. This is unlikely to be false in Nepal’s case as well.So let’s see what the award-winning car boasts with the two options available in Nepal. Citroën C3 has the same design language that can be seen in other Citroën cars in recent years. It has a bold and aggressive look with the two metal-like lines in the front with the Citroën logo. There are two LED daytime running DRLs at the end of the metallike lines. Just below the LED DRLS are the main headlight which provides good lighting during the nighttime. The fog lights are found on the bottom like most of the cars with an orange accent around it. These orange accents can be found all over the exterior of the car. The sides are similar to most the compact SUVs with black and orange accents on the bottom half. The door handles are not grab handles, but old-school ones. These small things have made Citroën C3 cut prices and get its name in the budget car category. The rear end of Citroën C3 is simple with standard tail lights and a Citroën logo. The ground clearance is pretty good 180mm, favourable for the rugged roads in Kathmandu. The roof rails are black and bring a contrasting look to the orange roof. The interior of Citroën C3 is also lively with the Anodized Orange colour option in the dash. You also have the option of an anodised grey colour option if you do not want the orange one. There is a 10.2-inch infotainment display with wireless Android Auto and Apple Carplay. There are four speakers in total which sound okay but distort in the max volume. The AC vents are just below the infotainment system and the climate controls system is below the AC vents. The steering wheel is basic, with the left side being empty and the right side having the audio controls. In front of the steering wheel, there is a digital instrument cluster where you can see information such as speed, fuel gauge, temperature gauge, distance to empty and trip manager. It, however, does not have the RPM metre. The centre console is sturdy including a gear shifter, handbrake cupholder and rear passenger windows buttons. The rear windows already have their own power windows in their respective doors but are also available in the centre console, which is quite odd.The seats are also comfortable with headrests and under-thigh support. Five people can seat in the car with two in the front (including the driver) and three in the back. The back seats are also comfortable with quite good legroom and headroom. The back seats fold down to add up to the available 315 litres of boot space.Citroën C3 has a good amount of storage space too. The centre console has a few compartments and cup holders where you can put small bottles or coffee cups. The door pads also have a good amount of storage where big bottles can also fit easily. Citroën C3 delivers impressive performance with its 1.2L PureTech petrol engine. This three-cylinder engine has a displacement of 1198 cc, generating a maximum power output of 82 PS (60 kW) at 5750 rpm and a peak torque of 115 Nm at 3750 rpm. The C3’s engine strikes a balance between power and efficiency, providing a satisfying driving experience.The fuel efficiency of the car achieves a rating of 19.8km/l as certified by a testing agency. Paired with a 5-MT (5-speed manual transmission), Citroën C3 offers smooth gear shifts and enhances control over the vehicle. With a fuel tank capacity of 30 litres, it provides a decent range before requiring refuelling.It features a suspension system that consists of a front MacPherson strut with a coil spring and a rear twist beam with a coil spring. For braking, Citroën C is equipped with front disc brakes and rear drum brakes. The front disc brakes offer efficient stopping power while the rear drum brakes provide reliable braking performance.The SUV comes with electric power steering, which enhances manoeuvrability and ease of steering. The minimum turning circle radius is 4.98 metres. The tyre size is 195/65 R15, providing a good balance of grip and comfort. The spare wheel, on the other hand, is a 165/80 R14 steel wheel, serving as a reliable backup in case of emergencies.Citroën C3 prioritises safety with a range of features designed to protect occupants. It is equipped with dual front airbags, providing essential protection in the event of a collision. For added convenience and safety, it is equipped with reverse parking sensors. These sensors assist the driver in parking and manoeuvring the vehicle in tight spaces, reducing the risk of collisions while reversing. It features ABS (anti-lock braking system) and EBD (electronic brakeforce distribution), which prevents the wheels from locking up during hard braking, maintaining steering control and reducing stopping distances. EBD optimises the distribution of braking force among the wheels, enhancing stability and control during braking manoeuvres. In terms of safety ratings, Citroën C3 has achieved a global NCAP safety rating of 4 stars.Citroën C3 is available in four colours in Nepal: polar white, zesty orange, platinum grey and steel grey. The prices of Citroën C3 in Nepal for the Live and Feel options are Rs 3,449,000 and Rs 3,649,000 respectively.Kathmandu, May 15Sajha Yatayat is expanding its electric bus service on a new route in Kathmandu.The company has started to operate three electric buses on the Patandhoka-Ratnapark-Gyaneshwar-Ratopul-Gaushala-Chabahil-Boddha-Jorpati-Dakshindhoka route from Monday.According to the cooperative’s General Manager Mahendra Raj Pandey, the company plans to run 15 electric buses on this route in the future.Out of the 40 electric vehicles brought by the company, only three were in operation. Now, with three more being used on a new route, it is looking to expand its network and use the electric buses it bought from China.With the rise in electric vehicle production along with technological advancements, many companies are in the race to build the perfect electric vehicles for the future. In the same race, Sony and Honda have come together as Sony Honda Mobility (SHM) to produce one of the most beautiful electric vehicles, Afeela. The electric vehicle is set to be on the roads in the spring of 2026 with the pre-orders starting at around the end of 2025. But why is the vehicle being talked about in the world now, in 2023?Maybe the answer is this: Afeela EV is set to be one of the best electric cars with direct competition with all the electric vehicle market leaders in terms of performance. Even though the complete specifications are not officially released yet, the SHM has revealed most of the things it is about to have. So what are they?Afeela EV will have a sleek design on the outside and a luxurious interior with the best entertainment system that might be available in a four-wheel vehicle. The car will be mostly focused on the autonomous driving part along with entertainment. As reported now, Aeela EV will have only one colour, greyish metallic. The main highlight of the front of the car will be the menu bar that is in between the headlights and below a light bar. The menu bar will act as an external display where it can show current weather, battery charge, latest scores of sports, and tyre pressure and also have different themes such as Spiderman and Fortnite, which can be managed with the help of an app or from the controls inside the car.Afeela EV will have as many as 45 external sensors, which helps in level-three self-driving. It will have a Lidar above the front glass window, which helps in the detection of all the objects in front of the car. The EV will have a simple design yet will be beautiful. The side mirrors will be replaced by cameras on either side, which display the live footage inside the huge display set.Afeela EV also will not have any door handles to enter the car. In the pillars will be camera sensors, which along with the side-view mirrors will able to identify the profile via facial recognition of the driver which automatically will open the door adding up another level to the autonomous experience. The tyre size in the front will be 245/40R21 and in the back 275/35R21. The alloys on the tyres will add up to the simplicity and beauty of the car. The front daytime running lights will run through the whole front deck and headlights will be on either side of the menu bar. The tail lights will run through the whole back of the car and also extend a bit to the side. The menu bar will also be allocated in the back but will be smaller in size in comparison to the front one but show almost all the things that are in the front simultaneously. The main focus of the Afeela EV will be the interior, which is set to be very luxurious with a variety of entertainment options. It will have a white background colour theme inside the car with environment-friendly seats. Each of the seats will have its own speaker, which can be used to play different songs for each passenger. Its back seats will be slanted, which will allow you to give more legroom space. The back seats each have their own personal screen attached to the back of the front seats headrest, which allows passengers to enjoy their own personal preference.The main display in the front of Afeela EV will be stretched across the whole dash as a single whole display. The main display can be used by two people at the same time and has a lot of features. The side-view camera footage will also be seen on the displays situated at each end. The display can be used to play movies such as Spiderman by Sony with the best music experience highlighted by Sony’s 360 reality audio sound. Each passenger can listen to something different with the same audio quality. You can also play games with the integrated Sony PlayStation, which also has a controller so you can enjoy the time while the car will be autonomously driving. If you want to drive the car, there will a very nice Yoke steering wheel with a head’s up display allowing you to see the front very clearly. You can also change the theme of the car and the display among Spiderman, Fortnite, Morbius and many more. This also changes the ambient lighting inside the car. There is also a regular mirror and a digital mirror to see the things in the back. There is no information yet about Afeela EV performance. Details about the range, motor types and power, battery capacity and charging time have not been disclosed as the car is still making progress. The safety part is also not fully described but along with the 45 external sensors and the internal sensor along with the safety standards, the safety issue might not be a problem. The SHM has also not disclosed its cost yet. Many people believe it would be around the 100,000 dollars mark. Its pre-order will start at the end of 2025 and will be delivered in the early spring, according to the SHM. The overall hype of the electric sedan is positive, but let’s see what Sony and Honda’s joint venture is set to provide.Schools in Nepal are always busy; many of them are even chaotic. There are students busy catching up with the syllabus of different subjects and teachers preparing for the classes, checking the papers and results. Talk to the people involved in school management, most of them tell you why the country’s school management system needs a revolution.There are over 30,000 schools in Nepal, and the majority of them are still undertaking the process manually. Students have to write long papers and teachers either take the copies home or stay back at school burning the midnight oil. Then, working parents, in particular, have a hard time checking their wards’ progress. Perhaps the sector awaits a digital revolution. Realising this, a team of young entrepreneurs have introduced Veda to many schools across the country.Now, with Veda, students and teachers save their time staying updated with the syllabus and grading the exams whereas parents have an easier way to stay updated with their children’s progress. Veda has mentored and guided more than 900 schools in Nepal, solving their basic and managerial system. Veda is a school management software application designed specifically for schools by Ingrails, a software company. The flagship app is the team’s attempt to digitise the entire education system and improve the knowledge-sharing process among teachers and students in Nepal. Veda is the brainchild of three young entrepreneurs who co-founded Ingrails: Nirdesh Dwa, Sujit Pathak and Sanjan Piya.Chief Executive Officer Dwa explains, “Veda includes customisable features like monitoring and managing visitor records, enrolment processes, staff management, archiving, inventory, homework and classwork management and checking, results, record keeping of students (attendance, health, merits, progress), billing and financing management, and library systems.”Additionally, schools can keep and manage records as well as other carry out evaluations of disciplinary and performance reports, similar to those used by the Ivy League, for all levels from class 1 to 10. “One can also look at the progress report of a child as they graduate the classes in one platform.”“The platform has been built with a mix of ERP (enterprise resource planning) systems and MIS (management information system). Any piece of information can be easily disseminated among the users within the system easing the communication among the school administration, teachers, students, and even parents,” he adds.Available in both web and mobile-based versions, Veda is more useful in desktop versions, but communication and tracking progress with mobile has been arguably the best feature of the app. “We realised that there was a communication gap between the school and the teachers, and our platform has abridged it significantly. They went from spending a lot of time and money on sending notices and updates through letters to digitising the whole process,” says Managing Director Pathak.According to Dwa, the app was not the same in the beginning. “We started as an offshore company, and we had been working with clients abroad. We knew each other and wanted to build our own company. But only after working in the sector for a while, we started noticing that there were gaps in the market in all sectors. Then, we decided to focus on education.”There were a few apps that some schools were using, but Nepali edtech companies had limited themselves to making accounting software. “So there were other many gaps in the system that we could address, starting with digitising of the manual management system and records. We first conducted thorough research on the history and current trends of the education industry.”Chief Operating Officer Sanjan Piya explains, “The Veda version we have today has evolved through many updates and research as well as our learning and failures. By understanding the needs of the schools, and addressing their individual needs, we can modify the platform and I believe, schools can basically all services that an institution might need.”While many platforms have focused on accounting software, attendance and billing, Veda also brought staff management systems, along with teacher evaluation and performance of administration, in an attempt to multiply the output. “They are able to trace the project and make more data-driven decisions.”Meanwhile, during the Covid pandemic, the Veda team helped the schools navigate through the new normal of online learning, making the whole process more seamless.But the developers want to clarify that they do not want to replace the teachers, staff, students or parents or their roles but only aim to empower them and automate their work. And all this makes Veda better than its competitors, claim the co-founders. Even though people do not know about Veda by name, they claim, people have used and appreciated the app in one way or the other.To achieve long-term satisfaction and loyalty from their users, the team says it has always prioritised giving technical support to the clients, with continuous feedback and adjustments. “Our biggest team is the technical support team so that clients can perform more smoothly,” says Dwa.But it took the team quite a while to understand and expand to this level. Pathak shares, “We started with only a handful of people at St Xavier’s. First, it took us time to enter the gate and make the school understand. But we convinced them and started our journey. The wait for the first step was long, the very next day, we got some five other clients and we were working full time.”With the new roles, the team also took together the realisation that it had to develop the platform considering that there will be people who will not be so technologically adept. “This is why we kept the platform, its interface and the steps as simple as possible so that they will be easy to use for all. And we also made sure to train all the staffers on how to use the app,” shares Pathak.To cater to the diverse user groups, the app is available in both Nepali and English. And, all the updates come in one timeline form, similar to Facebook, so that staying updated for anyone is just a scroll away.“There was a problem at the beginning. But we had a team set in the field to cater to any queries or technical problems,” he adds, saying that now the team now knows and is prepared for the needs of the clients and the problems that might arise.The team says the pandemic experience also helped it cope with the resistance from parents who were not familiar with the technology. “Also, many parents are in their 30s now, and they are technologically sound, so the particular problem is decreasing,” adds Piya.The co-founders of Veda were one of the few early young entrepreneurs that Nepal saw as Veda started in May 2016. Now with all the experience and work, it has gained the trust and tied with more than 900 big and small, public and private schools in Kathmandu, Mustang, Chitwan, Janakpur, Nepalgunjg and Butwal among others, with more than 1.6 million users. “As a part of our corporate social responsibility, we have also tied up with 70-80 government schools,” adds Piya.Veda has made its presence known outside the country too by working with schools from Brunei and Japan. “We had plans to expand, but even before we executed them, the foreign schools approached us online, knowing about our product. And we feel validated to get the clients who sought us,” Dwa says. “The schools that work with us always give our referrals, since the start, so we are growing and happy about it.” Validation also comes from the many awards it has bagged so far.  “We are ISO-certified and IRD-listed. We have also received the National ICT award, and the Microsoft award, and last year got listed in Forbes 30 and 30 Asia. And we are looking forward to more.”“Apart from us, the schools using Veda that win awards and perform well across the country also acknowledge our platform and give us credit for their success. That makes us happier than our own accolades,” adds Pathak.Kathmandu, May 16Internet service providers (ISPs) have been instructed not to charge more than the prescribed internet fees set by the Nepal Telecommunications Authority.This comes after some service providers increased their fees on their own.Some ISPs increased fees stating they were given the green light by the authority. However, the authority has said it has made no decision allowing ISPs to increase internet fees.According to the Telecommunications Act, ISPs can only increase the tariff after the approval notice is published by the authority.The authority says that no service provider has been given permission to increase the tariff recently.Realme is about to launch yet another budget smartphone in Nepal after it launched Realme C55 back in April. Realme Narzo N55 is the latest launch from the Narzo series, which is already very popular in India and Nepal. The new phone is already released in India and is getting a good response for the price range. The phone, however, is the rebranded version of Realme C55 with almost all the specs being similar with some changes in the design. Hence, its market performance is still questionable. Realme Narzo N55 boasts a design that closely resembles Realme C55, released a while ago in Nepal. The phone has a boxy design with a plastic back featuring a dual-tone matte shiny finish that gives it a stunning look. The back does not pick up obvious fingerprint smudges while the dual-camera setup is enclosed in the upper shiny curved box that highlights the camera rings.It has a thickness of 7.89mm and a weight of 189.5 grams. The in-hand feel is very nice with a premium glass feel. On the front, it has a hole-punch selfie camera and a mini capsule display, similar to iPhone 14 Pro’s dynamic island. It is a software rather than a hardware feature. The same feature was available in Realme C55, the first Android phone to have that feature.It comes with a 6.72-inch 90Hz IPS LCD display. The resolution is 1080X2040 (FHD+) pixels and has a 20:9 aspect ratio. It boasts a peak brightness of 680 nits, which is pretty good under direct sunlight. It has a touch sampling rate of 180Hz and 16.7M screen colours.Under the hood, Narzo N55 packs a MediaTek Helio G88 chipset with an octa-core CPU that can reach up to 2.0GHz. The phone’s graphics are powered by ARM Mali-G52, which can easily handle day-to-day tasks like calls, messaging, social media, light gaming, and video streaming. It runs on the Realme UI 4.0 based on Android 13.Narzo N55 comes in two RAM options: 4GB and 6GB. The 6GB variant has an extra 6GB virtual RAM option, providing a total of 12GB RAM. It is also available in two storage options: 64GB and 128GB, paired with 4GB and 6GB RAM respectively. On the back, it features a dual-camera setup with a 64MP AI primary camera and a 2MP depth sensor. The rear camera captures excellent photos in good lighting conditions, with several photography features, including AI beauty, filters, AI scene recognition, professional, night mode, panoramic view, portrait mode, street, HDR, 64MP mode, starry, Chroma boost, Bokeh flare portrait, and AI colour portrait.The rear camera can record videos at 1080P/60fps, 1080P/30fps, 720P/60fps, and 720P/30fps. The 64MP sensor enables it to capture high-resolution and detailed photos and videos. On the front, Narzo N55 has an 8MP AI selfie camera capable of recording videos up to 1080P/30fps and 720P/30fps. It also comes with several photography features, including beauty, filters, night mode, panoramic view, portrait mode, HDR, and AI scene recognition.The phone houses a 5000mAh battery that supports 33W SUPERVOOC charging via the in-box charger. According to Realme, it can charge up to 50 per cent in just 29 minutes using the 33W charger. It has two nano card slots and a MicroSD card slot for the sim and extra storage, respectively.It features several sensors, including a magnetic induction sensor, light sensor, proximity sensor, and acceleration sensor. It comes with a 3.5mm headphone jack and a type-C port for charging and file transfer. For connectivity, it has Bluetooth 5.2 and 2.4/5GHz Wi-Fi. It comes in two colour options: prime black and prime blue.Realme Narzo N55 is expected to cost Rs 20,000 for the 4/64GB option and Rs 24,000 for the 6/128GB option in Nepal. Realme Narzo N55 and Realme C55 are the same with almost all the similar features. The only difference is their design and RAM options. Even being the same in terms of specs, people might have different perspectives on the design on which they choose. Either way, having the same specs, Realme Narzo N55 might do good in the budget smartphone category in Nepal. After the launch of Vivo V25 and Vivo V25e, Vivo is set to release its premium midrange and midrange phones, Vivo V27 5G and Vivo 27e, respectively in Nepal. The V series phones by Vivo are some of the most loved smartphones in Nepal with their beautiful design and specs in the price range. So time will tell if the new phones will retain that image. Here, we will talk about Vivo’s V27 5G, which has already got a positive review in India.Vivo V27 5G has a beautiful design with a thickness of 7.4mm. The magic blue colour option has a colour-changing glass back, which when shown in the sun or direct UV light can darken the colour. The back features a triple camera setup in a slightly bumped curved rectangle area. It would not wobble when kept on the back. The rear camera also features an aura, a ring-shaped flashlight that adds an aesthetic look. This light has two LED lights allowing users to click nice and detailed pictures even in a dark room. The front of Vivo V27 5G has a 3D curved display with a hole-punch camera cutout. The bezels are at the top and the bottom as the sides curve into the frame. The in-hand experience of the smartphone is light and feels premium. Even having a lightweight and thin thickness, it can withstand a drop from a handheld height. It has a display of 6.78 inches with a screen-to-body ratio of 90.4 per cent. The AMOLED technology of the display produces deep blacks, vivid colours, and high contrast ratios. It can exhibit up to one billion colours. The display has a 120Hz refresh rate, making it smoother for scrolling and animations. It also supports HDR10+ for a more realistic visual experience. It has resolution is 1080×2400 pixels, with a density of 388 pixels per inch (PPI) and a 20:9 aspect ratio. Vivo V27 5G is powered by the Mediatek Dimensity 7200 chipset, built on the 4-nanometer process. The octa-core CPU features two high-performance Cortex-A715 cores clocked at 2.8 GHz and six Cortex-A510 cores. It is equipped with the Mali-G610 MC4 GPU, which provides smooth and responsive graphics performance. The OS in the smartphone includes Vivo’s own Funtouch 13, which is based on Andriod 13 that offers several customisation options and features.In Nepal, it is available with only one RAM and storage option, which are 8GB and 256GB respectively excluding the 12GB RAM and 128GB storage options. Vivo V27 5G has a triple camera setup on the back, which includes a 50 MP Sony IMX766V primary camera with a wide aperture of f/1.9, PDAF and OIS, which helps to keep images stable and focused. The remaining sensors include an 8MP ultrawide camera with a 120˚ field of view and a 2MP macro camera. It can record 4K videos at 30/60fps and 1080p videos at 30fps with a stabilisation feature for less shaky videos.The rear camera system supports various shooting modes, including night, portrait, photo, video, micro movie, high resolution, pano, documents, slo-mo, time-lapse, supermoon, pro, sports, double exposure, dual view, and live photo. These modes allow users to experiment with different types of shots, from slow-motion videos to time-lapse photography.On the other hand, the front camera is equally impressive, with a 50MP sensor and a wide aperture of f/2.5. The front camera also supports various shooting modes similar to the rear camera system. It can also record 4K videos at 30fps and 1080P videos at 30fps. Vivo V27 5G is equipped with a powerful 4600mAh battery that can last all day with moderate to heavy use. Moreover, it supports super-fast charging technology with a 66W (11V/6A) charger, which can charge it from 0 per cent to 50 per cent in about 20 minutes.It is equipped with a range of sensors, including an accelerometer, ambient light sensor, proximity sensor, e-compass, in-display fingerprint sensor and gyroscope. In terms of connectivity, it supports dual-band Wi-Fi (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz) and Bluetooth 5.3 for faster data transfer and better signal reception. It also has a USB Type-C port for charging and data transfer.Out of the four colours–noble black, flowing gold, magic blue and emerald green–only two colours, noble black and magic blue, are available in Nepal.The Vivo V27 5G is officially released in Nepal with a price tag of Rs 58,999 for the 8/256GB option.Nothing as a gadget production company is taking the internet and market by storm. Established by former OnePlus co-founder Carl Pei, his strategy and marketing have led Nothing to a whole new level. Compared to rivals such as Apple, OnePlus and Samsung, Nothing has got a lot of approval from reviewers with its sleek marketing tactics. With Nothing Ear 1 earbuds being the company’s first official product followed by Nothing Phone 1, it recently unveiled Nothing Ear 2 earbuds, which we believe might be in direct competition with Apple’s AirPods, at least in Nepal. Before giving you our verdict, let’s find out in detail about Nothing Ear 2.Nothing Ear 2’s design is similar to Nothing Ear 1. The buds look identical to Ear 1 with slight changes like the branding from Ear 1 to Ear 2. Except that, the position of the mics is changed. The case has a bit of change with its compact size — the dimple on the top and hinge is smaller than that of Ear 1’s case. It has a metal built with a stronger magnet. The white patterned plastic is now plain having less chance of scratches. Other than that, the case has the same LED light, the same USB type-C port and the same pairing button. It has a dual-chamber design with an improved diaphragm made up of graphene and polyurethane. The IP rating is also changed from Ear 1, which had an IP54 rating. Nothing Ear 2 has IP54 buds and IP55 case water and dust resistance. Nothing Ear 2 is packed with features similar to Ear 1 but with a slight change in its features like the earbuds control. Ear 1 had touch control, which was already the best, but now, Ear 2 has pinch controls. The pinch controls have four sensors and four press control features. With Nothing Ear 2 buds, users can single press and easily play/pause their music or answer/hang up calls. Double pressing allows for skipping forward or rejecting calls and changing tracks, while triple pressing enables skipping back. Double pinch and hold help in increasing or decreasing the volume. It also allows the user to switch between active noise cancellation and transparency mode by pressing and holding either the left or right earbud.It has wear detection, meaning it can pause the music itself after you take the buds out of your ears and will play back after you put it on again. It has a unique dual connection feature allowing you to connect two different devices at the same time. For example, you can connect it to your phone and laptop. While watching a video or playing games on your laptop, if a call rings on your phone, you can answer the call using the buds and talk instantly. As the call ends, the buds will reconnect back to your laptop and you can continue watching videos or playing games directly. It can be controlled fully with the Nothing X app and you can have your own personal sound profile. The equaliser in the app allows you to choose between options such as balanced, more bass and more treble voice or have your real-time custom profile. The app and the buds with algorithms analyse your sensitivity to different frequencies dynamically adapting to your hearing and the content you are listening to, in real-time. Every part of every song, video or game, is completely tailored to your preference.Users also have the option of personalised active noise cancellation (ANC) in Nothing Ear 2. They can now switch between three levels of ANC or let Ear 2 take control of the sound. The adaptive mode detects distractions in the environment before the users do, making it a useful feature. The ANC can silence the background or unwanted noise of up to 40 dB. The Nothing X app also has a “Find my buds” feature in case your buds get misplaced or stolen. That is not a new feature but is very handy as many people tend to lose buds very often. Nothing Ear 2 is equipped with an 11.6 mm dynamic driver, which delivers clear and powerful sound. The diaphragm is made of graphene and polyurethane (PU), which provides a lightweight and rigid construction that allows for accurate and detailed sound reproduction. The earbuds also support multiple Bluetooth codecs, including AAC, SBC, and LHDC, which ensure a high-quality wireless listening experience.It is designed to deliver a truly authentic sound experience. Hi-res audio certified for playback up to 1 Mbps, the earbuds support frequencies up to 24bit/192 kHz, ensuring that sound details are protected and playback is faithful to the artist’s intentions. LHDC 5.0 codec is also supported, providing high-resolution streaming over Bluetooth without compromising on quality.Nothing Ear 2 earbuds are equipped with a rechargeable li-ion battery that boasts impressive battery life. The buds themselves have a capacity of 33mAh while the charging case has a capacity of 485mAh. When the ANC is turned off, users can enjoy up to 36 hours of playback time with the case, or 6.3 hours of playback time with the earbuds alone. With the ANC turned on, the playback time is reduced to 22.5 hours with the case and 4 hours with the earbuds alone. For talk time, users can enjoy up to 20.5 hours with the ANC off the case and 3.5 hours with the earbuds alone. With the ANC on, the talk time is reduced to 17.5 hours with the case and three hours with the earbuds alone.Nothing Ear 2 earbuds also offer convenient charging options. With fast charging enabled and ANC off, users can charge the earbuds for 10 minutes and enjoy up to eight hours of playback. For wired charging, the earbuds use a USB Type-C cable. Additionally, the charging case is Qi certified and supports wireless charging up to 2.5W, offering users a hassle-free charging experience.Nothing Ear 2 earbuds offer seamless connectivity with Bluetooth version 5.3 and support several Bluetooth profiles for compatibility with a wide range of devices. They are compatible with Android 5.1 and above and iOS 11 and above, making them a versatile option for users of both platforms.Nothing Ear 2 might be soon available in Nepal with an expected price of Rs 19,000.Nothing Ear 2 has improved a few things from the previous model, Ear 1. In the expected price range, with all the new features added and competing in the market, Ear 2 might do pretty well. It is in direct competition with earbuds higher than its price range like Apple’s EarPods, Samsungs Galaxy Buds, Beats Studio Buds and Huwaie Freebuds. Kathmandu, May 10Mark Parsons and Gagan Sharma, two international AI and data science experts, are running a workshop in Kathmandu on May 21, the organisers have announced.“With their vast knowledge and expertise, the renowned professionals aim to empower women in Nepal to excel in these fields through an exclusive workshop only for women where they hope to inspire and recruit talented individuals for potential jobs and internships,” says Proxmed Pty Ltd, the organiser. Parsons is the executive director of the Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre and professor of medicine and neurology at the UNSW South Western Sydney Clinical School, a professor of neurology at the University of Melbourne, and a visiting professor at Fudan University in Shanghai. Gagan Sharma, on the other hand, is an experienced professional with more than 10 years of experience in creating and leading solutions for neuroscience research, including large-scale clinical trials. He has worked on numerous projects across the world, including in Nepal and is recognised as a leading expert in the field of AI and data science.The workshop will be held from 10 am to 4 pm that day at the Marriott Hotel in KathmanduInterested individuals can register for the workshop by May 14 by visiting this link.As the spring season reaches its peak in Kathmandu, major roads in the city turn purple. Beautiful flowers from big plants blanket tarred roads and busy sidewalks—just to get crushed by speeding tyres and hastening feet after a while. But, if you catch the scene before the blooms are trodden by the vehicles and people, you will feel blissful for a moment.Perhaps there are a few hundred people in Kathmandu who have not seen jacaranda flowers. Maybe, the number of people who recognise it as jacaranda is even lower. Apparently, numerous posts on social media around this time every year suggest that thousands of Kathmanduites mistake this foreign plant for their native ‘shirish’ (mimosa).Jacaranda undoubtedly is not native to Nepal. So where did it come from? How and why is it so popular in Kathmandu that locals mistake it for some other plants? Why are people confused about shirish and jacaranda, and why native shirishes are less common here than alien jacaranda? These interesting questions do not have easy answers.In an attempt to find answers to these curiosities, it seems jacaranda is an exotic lover of Kathmandu, which has contributed to the city’s beauty but still posed threats to it.Owing to the characteristics of the plant, botanists agree that jacaranda (Jacaranda mimosifolia) is native to South America (Brazil, Mexico and Argentina). The plant is common in many Asian, African and European countries these days.Nepali botanists and historians suggest that Rana aristocrats brought this plant to Kathmandu in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. There are, however, different claims about who actually bought it and why they were attracted to this foreign flower while their own country was full of exotic flora.Historian Saurabh, who also has a wide range of knowledge about plants in Nepal, says that Sur Shamsher Rana, a member of former Prime Minister Bir Shamsher’s family, brought the plant to Nepal in the 1920s from Darjeeling or any hilly area of India. He planted the flower in his private garden, near the place where Hotel Yak and Yeti was established later, in Darbarmarg, and this was the first jacaranda plant in Nepal. The author in his controversial book Asahamati further writes that it was King Tribhuvan who gave life to the second jacaranda plant in Kathmandu. He planted the flower in front of the southern gate of the Narayanhiti Palace, across from Jai Nepal cinema hall today.On the other hand, Tirtha Bahadur Shrestha, whom contemporary Nepali botanists refer to as the leader of the first generation plant scientists of the country, believes that it has already been around 150 years since the plant was first brought to Nepal. However, he also agrees that members of the Rana family were behind the import. “It is difficult to figure out the exact date of the import,” he says, suggesting it must be in the mid or late 19th century. He shares, “The plant first came to Ranas’ gardens and few plants came to the streets later. Jacaranda became common in Kathmandu when the government itself planted the flowers around Tundikhel ground in the 70s.”Many people, including Saurabh, believe that the flowers were planted across the city in 1961 when Queen Elizabeth II visited Nepal. Shrestha does not agree with the claim saying there were only a few jacaranda flowers in Kathmandu then.But Saurabh believes the road around Tundikhel itself was constructed before the Queen’s trip and jacaranda, among other plants, was planted at the same time.The history of confusion between jacaranda and shirish is as old as the growth of jacaranda in the city.Of course, there are similarities between the plants as they both are members of the mimosa or albizia family. Shrestha says the compound leaves of the two plants look alike; hence botanists have registered them in the same family.In the albizia family, shirish (loosely translated as mimosa in English) is the chief type. The shirish itself has dozens of variants and eight of them are available in Nepal, Shrestha informs, adding they do not have separate names in Nepali, but are known for their colours (kalo shirish, rato shirish, seto shirish).The botanist, however, sees no point in comparing shirish and jacaranda. Jacaranda, at least the one that is in Kathmandu, has a peculiar purple colour whereas shirish of such colour has been never been found in Nepal.Shrestha ‘blames’ noted novelist Parijat for creating the confusion. Parijat, in her masterpiece Shirishko Phool, identifies jacaranda for shirish, according to him. “Parijat spent her childhood in Darjeeling where there were many shirish plants. Then she came to Kathmandu and thought jacaranda was also a kind of shirish as they had similar leaves,” Shrestha claims, “She then asked essayist Shankar Lamichhane to write an introduction to her novel. Lamichhane did not know what a shirish flower looked like. He asked officials of the then Department of Plant Resources and they told him that the shirish was a synonym for jacaranda.”Saurabh in his article, however, refutes Shrestha’s claim about the ignorance and innocence of Parijat and Lamichhane. He does not categorically explain how the confusion surfaced.Shrestha explains that difficulty in cultivating native shirish is also one of the major reasons for the confusion. Whereas jacaranda can grow on its own without human care and attention, shirish is a garden plant that demands a lot of effort to cultivate. “That is why it is easier for people to perceive jacaranda as shirish rather than sweating over the shirish itself.”“Our psychological tendency of ignoring things which are already available around us and valuing new things is also a part of the confusion,” he adds, “Otherwise, there are many benefits of shirish. They contribute to nitrogen-fixing in the soil and make it more fertile. It also has medicinal values.”The confusion between shirish and jacaranda has forced both the plants to lose their identity. Whereas only a few Kathmanduites recognise shirish, which is native to their own land and which has a revered position in some of greatest Sanskrit epics by Mahakavi Kalidas, failing to recognise jacaranda itself is also a problem from the botanical perspective.Gardeners working for Ranas did not know which flower it was; therefore they gave their own name to jacaranda, according to Shrestha. “Most of the gardeners were Newars of Kathmandu and they called it ‘chakhunba swan’, which literally translates to ‘sparrow flower’ because a fallen jacaranda flower looks like a sparrow in its shape when you pick it up from the ground and put it on your palm.”Botanists believe that it is wrong to translate the names of plants and species into new languages because their names carry detailed information about the origins and development of the plant and its characteristics.“‘What’s in a name’ is a different philosophy with its own value, but in botany, names hold importance and any plant has to be named correctly,” Shrestha says, suggesting translating shirish as mimosa and jacaranda as ‘nilo (blue) shirish’ or ‘chakhuncha swan’ is wrong for they pose threats to their identity as well as the botanical knowledge so far achieved about the plants.“If jacaranda was not named jacaranda, you could not trace it to South America and see how it moved to other places of the world.”In the past four decades, the spread of jacaranda has been steady in Kathmandu. Whereas its contribution to the aesthetics of the city is appreciable, environmental scientists fear that the uncontrolled growth of such plants may pose threats to native plants and other aspects of the environment.“Jacaranda grows fast; it takes only a few years to grow up. On the other hand, it can grow in any kind of soil,” Yadav Upreti, environment scientist at the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Nepal office, informs, “Therefore, the plant will  spread more in the Kathmandu Valley if we do not do anything.” His tone suggests that some initiatives have to be taken to control the spread.Shrestha adds that a changing Kathmandu also has a role in its speedy growth. “Around four decades ago, there were fewer people in Kathmandu, and you could see mists and dewdrops in the morning. Now, with the growth in the number of people and vehicles, the temperature in the city has significantly gone up; subsequently, you rarely find dewdrops on the ground,” he explains, “Kathmandu in its original state was not an appropriate place for South American plants like jacaranda. However, recent changes are making it a favourable one.”That is why there are some jacaranda plants in dense forests of the Valley like the one at Swayambhunath these days, according to Shrestha. Though it looks quite beautiful to see purple flowers blossoming in green forests, they might result in the extinction of local plants, he warns.Therefore, Shrestha suggests concerned authorities launch a study about the invasive nature of jacaranda and its impact on local plants—because no such research has been conducted in Nepal ever. Its growth can be ‘managed’, not ‘controlled’, while still embracing the beauty it adds to the city.From the archiveKathmandu, May 10Former home minister Bal Krishna Khand has been arrested in Kathmandu for his alleged involvement in the fake Bhutanese refugee scam.Khand is considered a confidant of the Nepali Congress president and five-time prime minister Sher Bahadur Deuba. He was the second-rank member of the Deuba cabinet before the general elections in November last year.A senior police official informs he was arrested at his own house in Maijubahal of Kathmandu this morning.Amid criticisms that the Nepal Police failed to arrest former minister and CPN-UML leader Top Bahadur Rayamajhi, another high-profile arrest has been reported.Meanwhile, Bal Krishna Khand’s personal secretary Narendra KC has been arrested in Jadibuti of Kathmandu, according to the police.The police so far have arrested nearly one dozen people in connection with the corruption case including former home minister Ram Bahadur Thapa’s advisor Indrajit Rai, Rayamajhi’s son Sandeep and former home secretary Tek Narayan Pandey.Media reports have also hinted at the involvement of former PM Deuba’s wife Arzu Rana and Khand’s wife Manju Khand, but the police say further investigation is underway. Kathmandu, May 11The United Nations refugee agency, UNHCR, has expressed deep concerns over the recently surfaced fake Bhutanese refugee scam, welcoming the government investigation. The agency has also clarified that its programme to resettle Bhutanese refugees in third countries in Europe and the Americas is already closed from December 31, 2016, and there is no plan to resume it.The agency says it has already communicated with government authorities and stakeholders about the closure of the programme.Kathmandu, May 10The main opposition CPN-UML has suspended its secretary Top Bahadur Rayamajhi from the party as Rayamajhi is absconding after an arrest warrant has been issued against him.A statement issued by the party’s general secretary Shankar Pokhrel says Rajamajhi has been suspended from the party role until the investigation into the fake Bhutanese refugee documentation case is over. After the police arrested influential Nepali Congress leader Bal Krishna Khand for his alleged involvement in the same case this morning, there was pressure on the UML also to take action against Rayamajhi.Meanwhile, UML deputy general secretary Prithvi Subba Gurung, speaking in the parliament today, also directed Rayamajhi to cooperate with the police for the investigation.Last week, the police received arrest warrants against the CPN-UML secretary Rayamajhi and his son Sandeep Rayamajhi over their alleged involvement in issuing documents identifying Nepali nationals as refugees to help them go abroad easily.Sandeep was arrested in Butwal and taken to the Kathmandu District Court to receive remand. Kathmandu, May 11The government has introduced a new bill with the aim of releasing former lawmaker Resham Chaudhary, serving life imprisonment for his involvement in the 2015 Tikapur incident.An official at the Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs says the government registered a Bill to Amend Some Nepal Acts, which also has a provision that people affiliated with political groups that have signed agreements with the government to join peaceful convicts will be freed of their charges. Besides Chaudhary, whose Nagarik Unmukti Party is already a part of the current government, leaders and cadres of the Netra Bikram Chand ‘Biplav’-led group can also benefit from the new law.Before the new parliament held its first meeting after the November 2022 elections also, the government brought an ordinance to free Resham Chaudhary. Resham Chaudhary has been proven guilty of the murder of some police personnel in Tikapur of Kailali in 2015. Whereas Chaudhary is serving his sentence at Dillibazaar Prison in Kathmandu. He was accused of the murder but was yet to be convicted when he ran and won the 2017 House of Representatives election in Kailali.Despite being elected, he remained on the run for many months before surrendering to the court and being sent to jail, thereby losing the lawmaker’s position.Ruling parties of different times have been making efforts to release Chaudhary in their bid to get his political support, but it has not been possible due to the complex nature of the case.   Nepal has a big market for Bollywood and any Bollywood celebrities coming to this small country is big news. The same happened earlier this week as star Amir Khan landed in Kathmandu, reportedly for a 10-day Vipassana meditation camp.As Khan’s Nepali fans were happy about him coming to Kathmandu, the news left many of them wondering what this Vipassana is all about. So to quench your curiosity, here we explain the idea and its growing popularity in Nepal.Vipassana is a technique of meditation. It is claimed to be one of the oldest types of meditation and is often related to the teachings of Gautam Buddha. Although it is frequently taught in the context of Buddhism, meditation is not affiliated with any religious or spiritual tradition. It has grown in popularity across the world as a secular practice in which individuals of all backgrounds and faiths can participate.Vipassana or ‘vi’ ‘passana’ means a special insight or clear sight in the ancient Pali language. In Vipassana meditation, practitioners typically focus their attention on their breath, bodily sensations, or other objects of awareness. The goal is to cultivate mindfulness and develop a deep understanding of the impermanence, dissatisfaction and the nature of existence. So, it can be understood that the practice of Vipassana meditation aims to develop insight by observing something, with heightened awareness, especially in life or the present moment, without judgment or attachment.Anyone wanting to be enrolled in Vipassana and get the experience can reach out to:Vipassana meditation is often taught in retreat settings, where participants dedicate a period, ranging from a few days to several weeks, to intensive practice. These retreats typically involve periods of silent meditation, guided instructions and group discussions to support the participants’ progress.The practice of Vipassana meditation typically involves: Though it is open and designed for all, the experience and benefits of meditation can vary from person to person and at different levels. But here are some expected results.In other words, such transformative practice can lead to personal growth and positive behavioural changes. One may experience shifts in attitudes, values, and habits, leading to personal growth, increased well-being, and a more meaningful and purposeful life.Vipassana courses are available in a variety of lengths, formats and levels of intensity. Depending on the Vipassana organisation or tradition, the particular offers may differ. Here are some examples of popular Vipassana courses:On April 18, poet and director Upendra Subba wrote something on his Facebook page that created a buzz among social media users in Nepal. He said how his daughter, a ninth grader at DAV Sushil Kedia Vishwa Bharati School, was humiliated by the school authorities after she failed her examinations. According to him, the school insulted and humiliated the child and the guardian. Representing thousands of guardians of slow learners in Nepal, he wrote, “The vice principal and two other people insulted and humiliated my daughter and wife saying, ‘We (the school) can’t teach this kid. Take her to another school, there is no medicine to teach her.’ ‘She can’t study. She can’t do anything by studying, instead, buy her a scooter and make her a Pathao rider.’ Afterwards, the mother and daughter came crying to me.”Following the incident, the school received flak from thousands of people, but it did not change anything to the situation. When Onlinekhabar tried to get the school’s comment, no one responded.  But Subba’s daughter is not an isolated case; there could be thousands of slow learners facing similar situations. The fact that a reputed school like DAV is engaging in such unfair practices towards underperforming students raises the concern that many other schools may also mistreat students who do not perform well on exams. Stakeholders say this is one of several flaws plaguing the education system in Nepal. Shaming slow learners on the basis of exam results can affect their psychology. Children who are humiliated for failing exams may also develop a fear of failure, which can prevent them from taking risks and trying new things in the future. Similarly, it can also lead to anxiety, depression and even suicidal thoughts in some cases. “Under the pretext of making students disciplined and sincere towards their studies, schools can’t humiliate and punish anyone,” says Suprabhat Bhandari, the president of Nepal Guardian Federation, an organisation of guardians. “Doing so would not only affects their psychology but also violate the law.”According to Nancy Flanagan, an education writer, students who are shamed repeatedly often respond by shutting down, avoiding the mortification of being unable to perform or behave in socially acceptable ways.Reportedly, if a student becomes too fearful of being humiliated and as a result, stops answering questions in class or avoids attempting anything, the teacher’s actions have the potential to harm the student’s academic growth and development.Instead of humiliating slow learners, teachers should look out for other ways that would encourage them to progress, experts say.Therefore, stakeholders say it is high time the concerned bodies and stakeholders thought about healthy ways to deal with slow learners. Now, they should realise that shaming and humiliating students do not provide answers.Most commonly in Nepali schools, every student is taught in similar ways whether they are sharp or slow learners. The only extra thing they do with slow learners is to put them into extra classes. This practice has been running for a very long in Nepali schools, but does this really work?  “No,” says educationist Bidya Nath Koirala. “The extra classes have been just a medium to earn money for schools,” he says. Additionally, those extra classes are exactly as similar to the regular classes. They do not hold any special effort to help them improve their studies.Bhandari considers those extra classes as a fashion in the education system. Extra classes should be occasional; they should be held only in a very necessary condition. “Running them regularly is unscientific and unproductive. Those occasional extra classes should also be conducted only for secondary-level students,” says Bhandari. To make the classes effective for slow learners, Koirala suggests the schools should first run the basic teaching. Then, the teachers should identify students’ strengths and weaknesses and teach again accordingly.Every student is different and has a different approach to understanding the content, so teaching everyone in a similar style will not be effective. “The students also need to openly tell their problems and confusion to the teachers. Parents are also equally responsible for it,” says Koirala.Bhandari adds that teachers should explore their interests and give priority to them first to improve the studies of slow learners. He adds, “The teacher also needs to put effort into exploring the factors that are weakening their education.”DK Dhungana, the president of Private and Boarding Schools’ Organisation Nepal (PABSON), says the schools should easily accept the condition of the students whether they are strong or weak in studies.   According to their condition, they should be encouraged in their studies, he maintains. In his view, the schools and guardians should work together to improve the studies of such students. “They should maintain frequent communication with each other to stay updated on the student’s academic progress,” says Dhungana, “They should timely share the student’s weaknesses and progress with each other. These things were lacking in the recent incident at DAV School.” A notice on Shop 509 at Kathmandu Mall in Kathmandu reads, “The shop owner has gone missing since January 15. The owner has 35 days from the date this notice was pasted to empty the space.”The notice was put up there by Diwa Sapana JV, which has been awarded the contract to run the mall by the Employees’ Provident Fund. It told the ward office that it had to do this after the owners of Net Art Studio stopped responding to calls and messages.Ever since the Covid pandemic, the number of people selling and shutting down their shops is increasing although the impact of the pandemic on other parts of public life is minimal. These closed shutters are another indicator of how volatile the country’s economy is at the moment.In the past, such shops and spaces used to be bought and sold for millions. Currently, there are no buyers.Manoj Dhamala, the manager of Arriving Fashion Wear at Sundhara Mall, says business is down and many businesspersons like him are worried about what is going to happen next. He says that he is waiting to sell goods worth Rs 20 million.“There are days I don’t sell anything. I used to sell goods worth Rs 100,000 a day. Now I sit and wait,” says Dhamala. Dhamala says that the business, which slowed down after the pandemic has still not picked up resulting in closed shutters across the capital.“This place is great. We’ve not struggled with footfall, but the recent economic recession has dried up business,” says Hamal.Many shops at Sundhara Mall are empty. A few people go there for beauty-related services, but shops selling clothes, shoes and cosmetics do not have customers.Sangam Bista recently sold his shop in Galkopakha. He says that he is not the only person to have sold his shop adding many closed shutters are empty on the road from Gongabu Chok to Thamel Chok.Even those who are doing business now are wondering if they can survive this. “How can a business survive when no one comes to buy anything?” he says, adding he is planning to leave Nepal for foreign employment in Dubai.He says that many have tried to sell their shops but with no buyers, people have decided to close down completely rather than paying rent.Sanjita Ale, who bought a dairy shop in Kapurdhara two months ago, is feeling the pressure as her daily sales are dwindling as expenses keep on rising.“The person who sold it told me that business is good. But it is nothing as told. I wonder if people have started to cut down dairy consumption,” says Ale.According to Kumar Karki, the chairperson of the Nepal National Federation of Entrepreneurs, so many closed shutters are a major concern as there was a time when it was almost impossible to find empty spaces. But now, the same spaces are vacant as shops are shutting down one after another.To-let boards have started appearing even at buildings at Darbarmarg, where it was near impossible to find closed shutters. Bishwajyoti Mall is a prime example as more than 50 per cent space is vacant.Shops are even shutting down in highly sought-after places like Labim Mall, Civil Mall and CTC Mall. Footfall in these malls has significantly gone down, say shop owners.This is worrying as many shops in these malls had been pre-booked when these malls were being built. With these malls vacant, commercial buildings in places like New Baneshwor are also struggling to find tenants. This shows a reluctance in people to open new businesses at the moment.Naveen Luitel, the chair of the New Baneshwor Business Association, says that 25 to 30 per cent of the shutters are vacant in the Baneshwor area. He says that most businesspersons in the area are planning to sell their shops if the right price is offered.“There was a time when many did not hesitate to pay Rs 100,000 as rent. But now with the recession taking place everywhere in the world, things are tight as many are struggling to pay rent,” says Luitel. “Banks are not handing out loans and cooperatives that support these businesses are struggling too. Times are tough at the moment.”Now, with many closed shutters in New Road, alarm bells are ringing within the business circle as many fear the worst is yet to come.Many shopkeepers also feel that lower footfall is a result of the rise in online shopping.Ram Kumar KC, the ward chair of Kathmandu 10, says the ward office is getting many requests to vacate the shops in the Baneshwor area as shopkeepers are out of contact.“We are getting requests every other day,” says KC.The situation in Lalitpur’s Mangalbazar is no different. According to local businessman Bhim Rajthala, there was a time people would refuse to empty the space even when offered compensation in excess of Rs 1.5 million.“Now people are ready to leave if they get around Rs 500,000. How times have changed,” says Rajthala, adding things are worse than during the two years of the coronavirus pandemic.He says that people are struggling to pay off their loans and struggling to sustain their businesses. What has not helped is the haphazard road construction in the Mangalbazar area. “We are wondering if this is happening due to the expansion of the market even within the new settlements of Lalitpur. But all of us are shocked at how badly business has gone down over the past year,” says Rajthala.But the situation of businesses in new settlements around Kathmandu and Lalitpur is the same. Due to this, the number of closed shutters is increasing. Luitel of the New Baneshwor Trade Association says that the government has to come up with a plan to protect small businesses.With no support and rising inflation, many businesspersons are shutting down businesses and leaving the country. “Policies should be made keeping in mind the problems faced by small businesses. It is clear they are struggling and the government has to do something to help them,” says Luitel.The government is estimating that the effects of the recession seen in the industrial sector are reaching the business sector. The National Statistics Office has predicted that the industry sector will contribute only 5.32 per cent to the gross domestic product (GDP) this year.Due to the decrease in vegetable, mustard, soya bean and sunflower oil production as well as iron and steel production, it is preliminary estimated that the total value-added growth rate in the financial year will go down by 2.04 per cent compared to the last fiscal year.According to the statistics office, due to the decline in imports and domestic industrial products, the growth rate of wholesale and retail trade is also negative. It is estimated that wholesale and retail trade, vehicle and motorcycle repair services contributed 15.39 per cent to the GDP this year.Karki from the Nepal National Federation of Entrepreneurs says, “If the government does not bring policies to protect businesspersons, businesses will continue to shut down, and the closed shutters will put pressure on the government’s revenue.” According to him, the high rate of customs assessment and high cost of goods have caused problems for traders who were shocked due to high-interest rates.“There is no money in the market. Banks are handing out loans,” says Karki. “With no business, it is hard for many to pay rent and with many buried in loans, they feel leaving shops is the best option.”Rajesh Kaji Shrestha, the former president of the Nepal Chamber of Commerce, says that businesses are being closed in the market because of the problems seen in the economy.“It is high time we needed to stop talking about problems and start working towards a solution. The government should do whatever it takes to revive the industry and businesses,” says Shrestha.This story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Neocolonialism is a term used to describe the economic and political influence that developed countries exert over developing countries, often through indirect means such as international trade, foreign investment and international aid. Nepal, a small landlocked country located in the Himalayas, has been subject to neocolonialism although it has not been a colony politically.Consequently, it is making significant negative impacts on the Nepali economy and politics. So it is about time the country thought of the solutions.One of the most significant negative impacts of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy is the unequal distribution of resources and wealth. Developed countries often use their economic power to extract resources from developing countries at a low cost, leaving little for local populations. This has been the case in Nepal, where multinational corporations have been granted access to the country’s natural resources, such as timber and minerals, at a low cost. This has resulted in the depletion of natural resources, environmental degradation, and a loss of revenue for the Nepali government.Furthermore, neocolonialism has led to the exploitation of Nepali labour. Many multinational corporations have established factories in Nepal, taking advantage of cheap labour and relaxed labour laws. These corporations often pay low wages and provide poor working conditions, leading to the exploitation of workers. This has resulted in a decline in the standard of living for many Nepali citizens.In addition to the impacts on the Nepali economy, neocolonialism has also had a negative impact on Nepal’s political system. Developed countries often use their economic power to influence the political decisions of developing countries. In Nepal, this has resulted in a lack of political autonomy, with decisions often being made to appease foreign governments and corporations rather than to benefit the Nepali people. This has led to corruption, a lack of transparency and a weakening of democratic institutions.Moreover, the influence of foreign powers in Nepal’s political system has resulted in a lack of investment in key areas such as education, healthcare and infrastructure. Developed countries often prioritise investments that benefit their own economies, not the Nepali economy. This has resulted in a lack of investment in critical areas, leaving Nepal’s citizens without access to basic services.Neocolonialism can inflict significant trauma on the Nepali economy and politics. They have been explained below:So, to eradicate the effect of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics, Nepal should follow the following measures:• Diversifying the economy: Nepal’s economy heavily relies on agriculture, tourism, and remittances, making it vulnerable to the external shocks of neocolonialism. Diversifying the economy by investing in new industries, such as technology and manufacturing, could reduce the country’s dependence on these sectors and strengthen its economic independence.• Promoting fair trade: Nepal could work to promote fair trade practices that prioritise the needs of local businesses and communities over foreign corporations. This could involve developing policies that protect local producers and workers from exploitation and support the growth of domestic industries and the Nepali economy, overall.• Investing in education: Education is a powerful tool for reducing neocolonialism’s effects by empowering citizens with knowledge and skills to participate actively in their country’s economic and political systems. Nepal could invest in education by increasing access to schools, improving the quality of education, and supporting vocational training programmes that equip young people with relevant skills.• Strengthening political institutions: Strengthening democratic institutions is an essential step in reducing neocolonialism’s effects on Nepal’s politics. This could involve promoting transparency and accountability in government, increasing civic participation, and supporting the development of independent media that can hold the government accountable.• Building regional cooperation: Nepal could work to build stronger regional cooperation with neighbouring countries, such as India and China, to reduce its dependence on Western powers on the Nepali economy and politics and increase its bargaining power in international negotiations. This could involve collaborating on infrastructure projects, trade agreements, and cultural exchanges that promote mutual understanding and respect.Overall, reducing the effects of neocolonialism on the Nepali economy and politics will require sustained efforts across multiple fronts. By diversifying the economy, promoting fair trade practices, investing in education, strengthening political institutions, and building regional cooperation, Nepal can take steps towards greater economic and political independence.Disability is a multifaceted issue that encompasses a range of impairments and conditions that impact the physical, mental, and social well-being of individuals. As highlighted by the World Health Organization, around 16% of the global population is living with a disability, which underscores the need for concerted efforts to implement appropriate strategies, including regional networking strategies, for their rights. According to the United Nations, “Disability is not a problem to be fixed, but a human rights issue.” Therefore, it is imperative to uphold the rights of persons with disabilities in all aspects of life. As stated in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, “States parties shall ensure that persons with disabilities can effectively and fully participate in political and public life on an equal basis with others”. By implementing effective disability and regional networking strategies, the rights of persons with disabilities in South Asia can be safeguarded, and they can be empowered to participate fully in society. In South Asia, disability presents unique challenges due to the region’s diversity of cultures and socio-economic conditions. This makes it essential to have regional networking platforms to address particular challenges and develop solutions that are tailored to the region.The intersection of disability and regional networking refers to the collaboration between individuals, organisations, and governments in a specific region to address the challenges faced by people with disabilities. In the South Asian context, this collaboration presents a significant opportunity to tackle the complex and multifaceted issues that people with disabilities encounter, such as limited access to education, healthcare, employment, and social services. While there has been progress in improving accessibility and inclusion for people with disabilities, there is still much work to be done. By creating networks that bring together individuals with disabilities, advocates, policymakers, and service providers from different regions, it is possible to share knowledge and resources, identify common issues, and develop effective strategies to promote the rights and well-being of people with disabilities in South Asia. Such networking efforts can also help raise awareness about disability issues and promote greater social and political engagement in the region.Regional networking can also leverage the diversity of the region’s languages, cultures, and social norms to achieve meaningful change. By sharing knowledge, expertise, and resources, stakeholders in different regions can work together to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of efforts to address disability-related issues. This approach can be particularly beneficial for countries that have limited resources and capacity to tackle these challenges on their own. The establishment of regional networking can prove to be an indispensable factor in addressing the multifarious challenges that persons with disabilities encounter in South Asia. The integration of a comprehensive and interconnected network that enables communication, sharing of knowledge and resources, and advocacy efforts can lead to significant improvements in the lives of people with disabilities in the region. Regional networks can foster collaboration and facilitate knowledge exchange, empowering people with disabilities to participate in decision-making processes and advocate for their rights.The World Health Organization recognises the importance of regional networks in addressing disability-related issues as they provide a platform for cooperation and communication among stakeholders. Such networks can help bridge the gaps that hinder progress towards disability inclusion by bringing together people with disabilities, their families, advocates, service providers, researchers, and policymakers.Achieving regional networking in South Asia regarding issues related to disabilities is not without its challenges. One of the most significant hurdles is the lack of awareness among people about disability and the need for regional networking. This results in a lack of support for disability-related initiatives and an underestimation of the benefits of regional networking.Another challenge is the inadequate infrastructure, which includes inaccessible transportation, public spaces, and buildings, that makes it difficult for people with disabilities to move around and participate in regional networking activities. The lack of financial resources, trained personnel, and technology further complicates efforts to provide necessary services and support to people with disabilities, limiting the effectiveness of disability and regional networking initiatives.There are numerous potential solutions to address the challenges of regional networking in South Asia. Effective implementation of the following key strategies can lead to significant improvements in this area.Raising awareness: Increasing public awareness about disability and the importance of regional networking is crucial. Various methods can be employed, such as public campaigns, workshops, seminars, and media platforms. These efforts can help to reduce stigmatization and promote inclusivity.Accessible information: A crucial aspect of disability and regional networking involves providing accessible information. This includes information on disability-related issues and access to technology, communication, and employment opportunities. The dissemination of information through accessible means such as sign language, Braille, and audio formats can make a significant difference in empowering people with disabilities and promoting their full and active participation in society.Capacity building: It is another essential strategy to achieve disability and regional networking in South Asia. This involves providing training and education to stakeholders on disability issues and advocacy, enhancing their knowledge and skills to enable them to contribute meaningfully to the network. Capacity building is vital in empowering people with disabilities to become active agents of change and promoting their social inclusion.Allocating resources: Both governments and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) can allocate financial resources, trained personnel, and technology to provide necessary services and support to people with disabilities. This can involve establishing disability-specific services and training programmes for personnel, among other measures.Collaboration with the government: It is a critical component in achieving disability and regional networking in South Asia. Working with policymakers and government officials to advocate for disability-inclusive policies and legislation can lead to a more accessible and inclusive society for people with disabilities. Collaboration with government agencies is essential in ensuring that the needs and rights of people with disabilities are integrated into policy and decision-making processes.In sum, regional networking has been identified as a pivotal element in tackling the multifaceted hurdles confronted by individuals with disabilities in South Asia. The formation of regional networks and the provision of easily accessible information, capacity-building, and partnerships with governmental entities constitute crucial strategies that can be employed to accomplish regional networking in South Asia. Through collaborative efforts, stakeholders can guarantee the inclusion and recognition of individuals with disabilities as valuable members of their communities and ensure the safeguarding and advancement of their rights at all levels.Protests have long been used as a tool to demand change and hold those in power accountable. However, when it comes to erasing corruption and political influence in the judiciary in Nepal, the power of protests is not so visible. While protests have the potential to raise public awareness and pressure authorities to address judicial corruption, these issues are deeply ingrained and difficult to eliminate. Recently, the Nepal Bar Association staged a protest against the delay in the appointment of the chief justice. Meanwhile, the judiciary in Nepal also faces protests, mainly from the Nepal Bar Association, on recurring issues such as corruption and political influences. But have they made any impact yet? Throughout history, protests have brought about significant social and political change. From the civil rights movement in the United States to the Arab Spring in the Middle East, protests have been a powerful force for promoting democracy, human rights, and social justice. In the context of judicial corruption and political influence, protests can raise public awareness about these issues and put pressure on authorities to take action. This pressure can be particularly effective when it is sustained and backed by a broad coalition of civil society groups and other stakeholders. In 2015, a massive earthquake struck Nepal, causing widespread devastation and exposing widespread corruption in the distribution of relief funds. Civil society groups organised protests and public campaigns calling for an independent investigation into corruption and for the judiciary in Nepal to hold those responsible accountable. As a result of these protests, the Supreme Court ordered the government to investigate and punish those responsible for the corruption. In 2020, Nepali civil society groups organised protests and public campaigns calling for judicial reform and accountability, and for the establishment of an independent judicial commission to oversee the appointment, promotion, and disciplinary action of judges. The protests led to the formation of a judicial commission, which has the power to investigate and discipline judges accused of misconduct or corruption. There are more successful examples of protests reforming the judiciary in Nepal. Despite the potential of protests to raise awareness and pressure authorities to address judicial corruption, erasing this problem is much easier said than done. Corruption and political influence are deeply ingrained and systemic issues in the judiciary in Nepal that require more than just public pressure to eliminate. In many cases, they are the result of a lack of judicial independence, a weak legal framework, and a culture of impunity that allows those in power to act with impunity. Addressing these issues requires more than just protest movements, but also legal reforms, institutional changes, and strengthening the independence and accountability of the judiciary. A major way to erase corruption from the judiciary in Nepal is to make the appointment process of constitutional organs free of political influence. To combat judicial corruption, countries also need to take specific steps such as strengthening judicial independence, improving transparency and accountability, building public trust, and implementing anti-corruption measures such as codes of conduct and whistleblower protections.While protests have the potential to put pressure on authorities to address corruption and political influence in the judiciary in Nepal, their effectiveness is not guaranteed. The success of protest movements depends on a range of factors, including the level of public support, the strength of civil society organisations, the ability to leverage media attention, and the willingness of authorities to listen to the demands of protesters. In some cases, protests have been successful in promoting judicial reform and accountability, as in the case of Brazil’s Car Wash investigation. In other cases, protests have failed to bring about change or even resulted in a backlash against activists and civil society groups. Protests do not guarantee that it is always possible to reform the system, yet they can be a part of a bigger reform process which also includes the role of media and other stakeholders. Yet, the action taken by the Nepal Bar Association is perfect now as it creates pressure for the government to make a decision about the appointment of the chief justice, the head of the judiciary in Nepal, faster.In addition to protests, international organisations and media coverage can play a role in promoting independence and combatting corruption in the judiciary in Nepal. International organisations can provide technical assistance and promote best practices while media coverage can raise awareness and put pressure on authorities to take action. Media coverage can bring attention to corrupt practices within the judiciary and help to expose cases of judicial misconduct and corruption. Investigative journalism can also help uncover systemic issues and hold those responsible accountable. For example, in Brazil, Operation Car Wash was a media-led investigation into corruption at the highest levels of government and business, which resulted in the prosecution of numerous politicians and businesspeople. International organisations such as the United Nations and the World Bank can provide support and guidance to countries seeking to combat judicial corruption. They can provide technical assistance, training and best practices to help countries strengthen their judicial systems and root out corrupt practices. For example, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has developed tools and guidance to help countries prevent and address judicial corruption.In conclusion, the potential impact of protests on corruption and political influence in the judiciary in Nepal is complex and multifaceted. While they can be a powerful tool for raising public awareness and putting pressure on authorities, they are not a panacea for erasing these systemic issues. To truly address these problems, legal reforms, institutional changes, and strengthening the independence and accountability of the judiciary are necessary. I settle comfortably, close my eyes and focus on my breathing. I take a deep breath and exhale slowly. You may have guessed that I am meditating or at least trying to. However, my thoughts are whirling while they wander from one subject to another even as I try to rein them in.As a socially anxious person, I am a bit nervous to be in this meditation session. Clad in loose, flowing white or red garments, people around me seem to be quite relaxed as they follow the guidelines of the instructor whose voice is calm, resonant and soothing. On cue, I too focus on following through with these instructions.As I breathe, the sweet fragrance of incense wafts through the room. Sounds of birds chirping percolate from the windows as the afternoon light filters in. There is a rhythmic sound of deep breaths being inhaled and exhaled. A melodious flute tune plays in the background, which is interspersed once in a while by the instructor’s voice.I am in this meditation class because I want to attain the calm state of presence that meditation is known to produce. And this class in attendance is organised by Osho’s disciples who impart the teachings of Osho, a spiritual leader from India. Osho himself was heavily influenced by Lord Buddha among other spiritual gurus. Indisputably, like most Nepalis, I too have heard of Osho’s meditation techniques, which I am currently hoping will get me results. As such, is it just hype or is there hope for me? I came here with an open mind, but I am feeling a little intimidated by the formality of the class and how my fellow participants seem to feel quite at home with the practice of meditation. Casting aside my self-doubts, I channel my thoughts to my breathing.As I breathe in the sun-filtered room with the instructor’s voice resounding in my ears, I remind myself to be mindful of my thoughts and emotions as each second pass by. With each inhale, I take in air through my nostrils and in each exhale, I breathe out slowly. Still, even though I seek quietude, my thoughts keep chattering in the depths of my mind. They turn to the past or leap to the future all the while evading the present, even though the instructor is advising us to be at the present moment. “Be here and now.” However, I find it easier said than done. As an anxious person, I am prone to catastrophising and overthinking. My mind tends to race with thoughts. It is one of the many reasons why I am here in this meditation class. I want to gain mastery over my anxious mind, not be its vessel to churn endless thoughts. And all the while I am inhaling and exhaling, I am asking myself: Will this work?Yet, minutes pass by in deep breathing and as the session comes to an end, I am surprised to see that my thoughts have calmed down significantly and a sense of quiet has settled in my mind. Somehow in an hour of meditation, my whirring nerves have relatively soothed to a state of peacefulness. And when the instructor concludes the class, I gratefully join my palms together in a gesture of namaste and extend my gratitude to the universe, cosmos and divinity. I also say thanks to my parents, family and spiritual leaders. Gradually, I open my eyes and see people in a sort of calm and collected presence. I too feel a happy buzz and I vow to meditate routinely and practice mindfulness. The buzz of meditation remains with me even on my way home.Now as a regular practitioner of meditation and mindfulness, I have somewhat found a sense of respite from my anxious mind. My anxiety still occasionally races in social situations and every now and then, I still have a tendency to catastrophise. But I see a glimmer of hope in the dark clouds as my mind seeks a place of peace, harmony and joy through meditation.     Sabitra Bhandari from Nepal is lighting up the Indian Women’s League (IWL). In seven, Bhandari, who is also known as Samba, has scored 26 goals including five hat-tricks (one seven-goal game) for Gokulam Kerala FC.With the team yet to play more games, it is likely that her goal tally will significantly go up as Bhandari, after being the highest scorer in Nepali women’s football, has created history and has become the all-time leading goal scorer in the IWL.Players like Bhandari shining in foreign leagues in South Asia is good for Nepali players and Nepali football. It allows them to test themselves with the best. That said, these players are sad that women’s football has not developed in the country as the football governing body, the All Nepal Football Association (ANFA), has not been able to conduct a women’s league this year. This means national team players who do not get the opportunity to play abroad have to wait a long time to play tournaments in the country.Things in countries like India and Bangladesh are different. A women’s league is being held in India regularly while Bangladesh recently announced Asia’s first women’s franchise football league. The league is set to start in May, in which players from Asia and all over the world are due to take part.When it comes to women’s football, India is South Asia’s powerhouse. Recently, Bangladesh are also on the up as they won the SAFF Women’s Championship for the first time by defeating both India and Nepal.Nepal, on the other hand, are yet to win the title. But the women who play are not to blame for this as preparations only start on the eve of the tournament. This has left many players disappointed as they believe they could do a lot better in these tournaments if there was a proper domestic structure and a national league.Nepal’s national women’s football team midfielder Renuka Nagarkoti is excited to play in India. But she feels Nepal is not doing enough for the women’s game.“Nepal not having a domestic league is sad for women’s football. But it gives me a lot of pride to play in India,” says Nagarkoti, who plays for Kickstart FC Karnataka. She believes if there is a regular league in Nepal, players will get exposure and new players will also get opportunities, resulting in a strong national team.Like Nagarkoti, Saru Limbu, Rekha Paudel and Anjila Tumbapo Subba, who are also playing in the Indian Women’s League for the first time, are also excited.Six players from Nepal are participating in the Indian Women’s League. Bhandari is playing for defending champions Gokulam Kerala while Subba is playing for Sethu FC.Similarly, Nagarkoti and Limbu are playing for Kickstart FC and Paudel is playing for Sports Odisha. Anita Basnet is playing for the new team, Lord’s FA Kochi. Except for Nagarkoti and Basnet, all the players are first-team regulars.Bhandari has become a goal machine this year as even India’s best players fall behind her. This proves Bhandari is a star player not only in Nepal but also in South Asia.She has been unstoppable as she has scored four goals each in three games, five and seven goals in one game each and two in another taking her total to 19 goals in six games. She has only failed to score in one game in the IWL this year, which ended in a goalless draw for her team.Subba has been solid in goal as she has kept five clean sheets in six games. It is safe to say that Nepali women are doing great in the IWL. It is likely all Nepalis will play in the quarter-finals of the IWL which will have four teams from each group. The quarterfinalist will also qualify directly for the next women’s league.It is clear India are miles ahead of Nepal when it comes to both men’s and women’s football. While the Indian Super League has been going on quite well, the country has started organising a league tournament for women, in which players from other countries can take part. But in Nepal, women’s football has always been under the shadows as ANFA could not even complete the league that was once announced.In 2021, ANFA conducted the National Women’s League in a double round-robin system with seven teams. Players from India and Africa took part in the league, which was seen as a positive step in women’s football in the country. But in 2022, things took an ugly turn after ANFA could hot host the second round of the league.The decision to hold the second round of the league in Biratnagar was made by former ANFA president Karma Tsering Sherpa, but when Pankaj Bikram Nembang was elected the new president, things did not move forward.Nembang’s team said it would host the event after the SAFF Women’s Championship, but it did not and ANFA announced the winner based on the points of the first round. The Armed Police Force team were declared the champions as they had won all seven games while Nepal Police Club finished second and Tribhuvan Army Club finished third.ANFA has not talked about conducting a new league in 2023 as it is struggling to finish the men’s league at the moment.Not having a regular league has hurt the women’s team. A prime example is the women losing to Bangladesh after finally beating India in the semifinal of the SAFF Women’s Championship in September 2022. Many players believe if women’s football in Nepal had a proper structure, they might have had a title to show for their efforts.Things are different in India and Bangladesh. Both countries are working with a vision to promote women’s football in their respective countries. The All Indian Football Federation, through Vision 2047, is working to develop both men’s and women’s football in the country. The Bangladesh Football Federation has also started to see the results of its investment in women’s football for a long time.ANFA also says Nepal’s aim is to win both women’s and men’s SAFF championships. But these are limited to talks as it has not invested enough to work for this goal.The double round-robin league was seen as a positive and with municipalities also taking part in it, many felt this would reach new heights. But ANFA, stating having teams from municipalities was problematic, has decided to conduct it in a different manner.But when will the league commence is anyone’s guess now.This story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Kathmandu, May 14Nepal is hosting the T20 World Cup Qualifier in November this year, says the Cricket Association of Nepal.CAN President Chatur Bahadur Chand says the International Cricket Council emailed CAN recently and assigned the responsibility. Participating teams have been informed already although the ICC is yet to make an official announcement, he claims.The ICC has not announced the T20 World Cup Qualifier schedule yet, but Chand says the qualifying event will be held in Kathmandu from November 1 to 10. The United States and West Indies are jointly hosting the T20 World Cup next year. There will be 20 teams, of which, 12 have already been selected directly. The qualifiers will be held to choose the remaining eight teams.Eight teams will participate in the T20 World Cup Qualifier to be held in Nepal, among which, two will be selected for the World Cup. They will include Nepal, the UAE, Oman, Hong Kong, Bahrain, and Singapore while the remaining two are yet to be finalised.Nepal are hopeful of World Cup qualification as they have recently won the ACC Men’s Premier Cup.  Kathmandu, May 11Nepal’s cricket governing body, the Cricket Association of Nepal (CAN), says the Nepal women’s cricket team are playing a bilateral series against Malaysia beginning later this month.It will be the first international event for the country’s women’s cricket team in 2023 as they last played in the ACC Women’s T20 Championship semifinal in Malaysia in June 2022. CAN says the five-match series will be held at YSD-UKM Oval, Malaysia, from May 29 to June 4. Kathmandu, May 11The Nepal cricket team are preparing to visit South Africa ahead of the World Cup Qualifier for warm-up matches.Cricket Association of Nepal (CAN) President Chatur Bahadur Chand says the team will visit South Africa in early June before heading to Zimbabwe for the qualifying event to begin later in the month.He says South Africa has been chosen for the preparation as both African countries have similar weather.For preparations, Nepal are likely to face Scotland and the Netherlands.Nepal’s ambassador to South Africa, Dan Bahadur Tamang, who is also a former president of the Nepal Volleyball Association, is making efforts to organise a match with the South Africa A team, Chand says. Nepal will play with at least two test teams in the qualifier, in which 10 teams will participate. Kathmandu, May 8The South Asian Football Federation (SAFF) says Lebanon will join the 14th SAFF Championship to be held in Bengaluru of India from June 21 to July 3.The Middle Eastern country will be the second outside-South Asia team to join the event, after Kuwait. An announcement regarding Lebanon’s participation was made on Monday.It means there will be eight teams in the regional tournament including six South Asian ones: Nepal, India, Bangladesh, Bhutan and the Maldives.SAFF has recently adopted an approach to including outside teams also to upgrade the level of football in South Asia.Nepal are the current runners-up in SAFF Championship whereas India are the defending champions.In the second ball of the 18th over in the final of the ACC Men’s Premier Cup, Gulshan Jha hit one of the biggest six of the tournament. Before Karthik Meiyappan’s over ended, Jha hit two more boundaries as the Nepal cricket team scored 16 runs off it, which tilted the game in Nepal’s favour.Jha’s obliteration of Meiyappan gave fans a belief that Nepal belonged on the big stage. The fans went wild as everyone at the TU Cricket Ground and millions watching at home started to dream of Nepal cricketers facing India and Pakistan at the Asia Cup in September.This is quite rare as the current ICC’s structure rarely allows associate teams like Nepal to compete with the big boys. But here Nepal were on the verge of creating history and booking their place in the Asia Cup for the first time.It has been 27 years since Nepal became an associate nation. But in all these years, they have not played a single game against India and Pakistan. Now, with this victory over the UAE in the final of the ACC Men’s Premier Cup, that wait is over. Fans are already excited about what happens to Nepal cricket after that.Nepal beat the UAE by seven wickets in a rain-affected final that had to be played over two days. Bowling first after winning the toss, the team displayed one of their best performances with the ball as they reduced the UAE to 106 runs for the loss of nine wickets in 27.3 overs before the heavens opened up and ended play on May 1.This was already a psychological boost as many felt Nepal had laid one hand on the trophy. The next day, Nepal bowled the UAE out for 117 runs and had the entire day to chase it down.Nepal cricketers love drama. When the UAE picked up three quick wickets including that of captain Rohit Paudel, there was tension on the ground. But Monty Desai’s decision to send Gulsan Jha, who was brought to the team in place of Dipendra Singh Airee, to bat at number three for the first time proved to be a masterstroke. Thanks to his unbeaten 67 and a 96-run partnership with Bhim Sharki, Nepal won the match with 117 balls to spare.His power-hitting was a joy to watch for the Nepal cricket fans as the left-hander dominated the UAE’s spin bowlers hitting six sixes and four fours.Jha was drawn towards cricket thanks to Nepal’s playing in the 2014 T20 World Cup. Born in Sarlahi, Jha went to Ranchi in India at his own expense to train to become a better cricketer. The players who he trained with there are struggling to get into the state team. Many have left India for life abroad while others quit cricket.But Jha along with others in the team now has a chance to compete with world-class players like Virat Kohli, Rohit Sharma, Babar Azam, Mohammad Rizwan, Shaheen Shah Afridi, Mohammad Siraj and Jaspreet Bumrah among others.Jha, who won player of the match in the final, was quite subdued in the post-match press conference.“I was ready for any responsibility. I was able to play as instructed by the coach. I did not think about the past or the future. I wanted to think about the present and help the team win,” he said.This is not the first time Nepal cricketers have qualified for the Asia Cup. After reaching the final in ACC Trophy in 2002, Nepal and the UAE qualified for the Asia Cup. But due to political tensions between India and Pakistan due to the Kargil War, the tournament was cancelled.Raju Khadka, the Nepal cricket captain then, still feels the pain as all their hard work had gone in vain as the team could not take on the best teams in the world due to no fault of their own.“We were so excited to play against test nations. But we could not go and that remains a dark day for us. Our dream was shattered,” recalls Khadka.Now, Nepal, after 22 years, have the opportunity to play the Asia Cup again. In 2002, Nepal had been an associate country for only six years. Fast-forward to now, Nepal have retained it thanks to the team’s incredible performance in the ICC Cricket League 2.Khadka says playing against teams like India and Pakistan is exactly what Nepal cricketers need to reach greater heights.“The dream we saw in the 2000s is turning into a reality now. Playing against big teams will not only change our players’ mindset but it will also change the way world cricket looks at us,” says Khadka.He is correct. Nepal cricket’s performance in the T20 World Cup in Bangladesh in 2014 exposed players like Sandeep Lamichhane and Rohit Paudel to cricket. It lit a fire in their belly as it gave them a belief that they too could represent Nepal on the biggest stage.“I was inspired by Paras (Khadka) dai and Gyanendra (Malla) dai during the T20 World Cup. I hope we can do the same when we play the Asia Cup,” says Paudel.Lamichhane, who became the player of the tournament, also believes this is a great chance for them to become immortals in Nepali cricket and inspire a new generation of cricketers in the country.Coach Monty Desai, who has been an integral part of the Nepal cricket team’s success in recent times, says that if they have a chance to demand bilateral series against full-member countries of the ICC, they can compete well against the likes of India and Pakistan. “I cannot wait to see the team play against teams like India and Pakistan. I’m going to enjoy it and see how they play their one-ball battles against the best in the world. It will be great to see if they showcase their best in a bilateral series against these great teams,” he said in the press conference after the final.Former cricketer Shakti Gauchan is ecstatic for the youngsters who are getting a chance to play against two great teams. He believes positive performance in the Asia Cup can result in great things for Nepal cricket.“We should play fearless cricket against these teams. We have to show them that we are not inferior to them. If we do that, opportunities will come our way even if don’t win. Our boys will also get to play in franchise leagues across the world,” says Gauchan.It is historic in itself for Nepal to play with India and Pakistan in the Asia Cup as an associate nation but it is not improbable. However, to get such an opportunity repeatedly, the hard work of the players and coaches is not enough. It is now up to the government to invest in cricket and cricket infrastructure.The Nepal cricket team have had this opportunity before but failed to do so after the T20 World Cup in 2014. Nepal’s cricket infrastructure is poor. The country does not have a well-equipped international cricket stadium and it also lacks a proper structure or development plan when it comes to cricket.Despite making promises during elections, neither the cricket body nor the state has been able to develop cricket at the grassroots level as it is limited to age-group tournaments every now and when. Like before, the government has decided to give each member of the team that won the ACC Premier Cup Rs 600,000. While is great for the current players, experts emphasise the need for systematic planning and investment in sports infrastructure and human resources if the country wants to do well internationally.Women’s cricket has been neglected. There is no pathway to the national team as it is dependent on a few academies. The Cricket Association of Nepal is yet to build an A team.Monty Desai says that in the last three months, Nepal cricketers have gained experience in playing under pressure, and now the country has to invest in physical infrastructure and exposure.”“I want there to be a development camp and Nepal A team. Now, not only for the men’s team, we have to think about the whole of Nepal cricket”, he says. “If we work hard, Nepal can be a full member soon and if everything goes as planned, we can host a test match here at TU Cricket Ground.”This story was translated from the original Nepali version and edited for clarity and length.Kathmandu, May 4The South Asian Football Federation (SAFF) has finalised the participation of Kuwait in the 14th SAFF Championship to be the first outside-SAARC team in the regional tournament.The event will take place in Bengaluru of India from June 21 to July 3.Kuwait will be the seventh team besides six teams from South Asia, namely, Nepal, India, Bangladesh, Bhutan and the Maldives. SAFF has recently adopted an approach to including outside teams also to upgrade the level of football in South Asia.Nepal are the current runners-up in SAFF Championship whereas India are the defending champions.Kathmandu, May 3The government has announced a Rs 600,000 cash prize for each member of the Nepal cricket team that qualified for the Asia Cup expected to be held in Pakistan in September.A cabinet meeting on Wednesday decided to award Rs 600,000 to a player and Rs 300,000 to an official in recognition of their victory in the ACC Men’s Premier Cup that concluded in Kathmandu on Tuesday, informs the government spokesperson Rekha Sharma.A standard operating procedure implemented by the government has it that the players winning such tournaments will get Rs 500,000 each. But the government decided to provide Rs 100,000 more.Meanwhile, Communications Minister Rekha Sharma says the budget plan for the next fiscal year would also allocate the money necessary for upgrading the Kirtipur cricket stadium to the international level.Nepal has always been a great place for tourism. Thousands of tourists visit Nepal each year to explore its natural beauty, culture, tradition, food and others. The tourists perform various activities in Nepal, from trekking to mountaineering and wildlife sightseeing.Besides all the above-mentioned activities, various international actors and filmmakers also visit Nepal to shoot films as they perceive Nepal as a filming hub. There are a plethora of foreign films that have been filmed in Nepal.  This week, Onlinekhabar has brought 13 worth-watching films that have been filmed in Nepal and hence prove Nepal as a filming hub. Released in 2022, Uunchai, directed by Sooraj R. Barjatya, depicts the story of three friends who are on a trek to Everest base camp.  A seemingly ordinary trek transforms into a profound and introspective expedition, weaving through personal, emotional, and spiritual realms. While grappling with their physical boundaries,  they explore the essence of freedom, transcending the mere constraints of their bodies.The movie features famed Bollywood actors Amitabh Bachchan, Anupam Kher, Boman Irani, Parineeti Chopra and others. Directed by Scott Derrickson, Doctor Strange perhaps is one of the most popular films that establish Nepal as a filming hub as several scenes have been shot in various places of the Kathmandu valley. It depicts the story of a phenomenal neurosurgeon who is drawn into the world of the mystic arts, during his journey of physical and spiritual healing. Doctor Strange, released in 2016, features Benedict Cumberbatch, Chiwetel Ejiofor and Rachel McAdams. Baby is another successful Bollywood film that treats Nepal as a filming hub as it is shot in Bhaktapur Durbar Square, Taragaun and others. The film stars Akshay Kumar Danny, Denzongpa, Rana Daggubati and others to show the story of an elite counterintelligence unit that learns a plot masterminded by a maniacal madman. The unit is on a mission to track the terrorists’ international tentacles and prevent them from striking the heart of India. Baby, released in 2015, is directed by Neeraj Pandey. Gharwali Baharwali,  a 1998 film, depicts the story of a couple who are happily married but have no offspring. The protagonist’s father dreams of having grandchildren. After a heart attack, the protagonist agrees to marry again to continue the family line. The plot of this film necessitates Nepal as a filming hub. As the story goes, the protagonist meets a village girl during a business trip to Nepal, and he ends up marrying her due to unavoidable circumstances. The title tells it all. Released in 2015, Everest depicts the story of mountaineer Rob Hall who hails from New Zealand. In 1996, he teamed up on a joint expedition with Scott Fischer to ascend Mount Everest.Besides these, there are a lot of other movies about Everest that have been shot in the country, strongly establishing Nepal as a filming hub.  Released in 1992, Khuda Gawah is shot in Jomsom. It depicts the story of Baadshah Khan, played by Amitabh Bachchan, who falls in love with Benazir, played by Sridevi,  a member of a rival clan who has defeated him in a game of buzkashi. Khuda Gawah is directed by Mukul Anand. Hare Rama Hare Krishna takes you back to a time when the hippie culture was prevalent in countries like Nepal and India. As a significant part of the film is shot in Nepal, it establishes Nepal as a filming hub. The film portrays the story of a Jaiswal family who disintegrates over an affair with the patriarch. Afterwards, the children get separated. Prashant, played by Dev Anand, moves with his mother to India, in a secure environment, while Jasbir, played by Zeenat Aman, stays with her father, in an atmosphere that pushes her towards emotional isolation. This thrusts her into the hippie culture as she grows up.Released in 2013, Up in the Wind is directed by Hua-Tao Teng. This is a Chinese romantic comedy film set in Nepal treating Nepal as a filming hub. The film is about a tour group that includes a food columnist and a second-generation rich person. The pair travel to Nepal on vacation. Throughout their expedition, they find themselves amidst challenging circumstances, including frequent power outages and local riots. Les tribulations d’un Chinois en Chine, also known as Up to His Ears, is shot in central Kathmandu around Swayambhunath temple and mountain areas. It is a film from the 1960s. Directed by Philippe de Broca, the film tells about the farcical adventures of unhappy suicidal billionaire Arthur Lempereur, played by Jean-Paul Belmondo. Katmundu is a Bengali comedy romantic film which tells the story of three bachelors who are on a holiday from a tiresome office schedule to Kathmandu. Released in 2015, the movie is directed by Raj Chakraborty.Like Doctor Strange and many others, this film establishes Nepal as a filming hub as most shots are filmed in the Kathmandu valley. Directed by Godfrey Reggio, Powaqqatsi is an exploration of technologically developing nations and the impact the transition to Western-style modernisation has had on them. It is shot in Kathmandu and Bhaktapur. Wai Si-Lei Chuen Kei, also known as The Legend of Wisely, is shot in Kathmandu and Jomsom; it hence establishes Nepal as a filming hub.The film released in 1987 is about a writer and his adventurer friend who are in search of a golden pearl left in a Buddhist monastery by a dragon.Black Narcissus depicts the challenges faced by a collective of nuns endeavouring to establish a convent in the Himalayas, where a combination of isolation, harsh climate, high altitude, and clashes with the local culture all work together to push the dedicated missionaries to the brink of insanity. Monkey Temple are one of the pioneers of alternative rock music in Nepal. Formed in the late 90s, the band have released four albums so far. They have also been on a number of national and international tours.Mostly known for deep lyrics and melodious compositions, they have been consistently performing live shows and releasing songs quite actively.    This week, Onlinekhabar has brought eight songs by Monkey Temple that you must listen to. The music video of Anumati was featured on MTV in 2012, making Monkey Temple the first Nepali band to be featured on MTV. The song released in 2011 comes from the band’s album, Shades of Grey. Sangai Bachauna is one of the most popular songs by Monkey Temple. As of writing this article, the music video of the song has over seven million views on YouTube. In the song, the singer is requesting his beloved to come to him only if she can fulfil his dreams. Tasbir is the recent release of Monkey Temple. Released in July 2022, this romantic song was written and composed by the band’s vocalist, Sareen Deoja. Its soft and soothing melody is complemented by a music video directed by Kuhang that showcases various facets of the relationship.Monkey Temple have also done a couple of cover songs and Hamro Nepal, originally sung by X-Marica, is one among them. The cover version’s music video showcases Nepalis living abroad as they proudly hold Nepal’s flag and sing the chorus of the song.Gahiro is popularly known for its guitar solo played in the song by Deepak Moktan. The song was released in 2014 on YouTube and it represents the album, Single. Gahiro is also another most-liked song by Monkey Temple; so far, the song has over five million views. Acoustic 11 was earlier only available in a raw acoustic version. But Monkey Temple in 2016 released its new version, accompanied by a music video featuring Jyotsna Yogi and Rajat Khadka. The song is about a lover who wants to be together with his beloved in any place she goes.In Samaya, the singer expresses his feeling about how he fails to recognise the passing of time. The song which has over two million views was released in 2017. Ajambari, released in 2019, has a beautiful music video. It shows how two lovers reunite after ages in an unexpected time and place. Kathmandu, May 9Famed Bhutanese Buddhist guru and filmmaker Khyentse Norbu, also known as Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche, is coming to Kathmandu later this month to release a new film, Dakini.The film with the English title, Looking for a Lady with Fangs and a Moustache, is being released in Kathmandu on May 19.Reportedly, the film made by Shatkon Arts is based on Buddhist myths about various goddesses. The film was shot in Patan and Panauti, two ancient cities in and near the Kathmandu valley. On the occasion of the premier show, Khyentse Norbu will give a masterclass, titled Beauty is a Trap.This is Norbu’s fifth film.Pasang Lhamu Sherpa was a fierce woman. At a time when women had to live up to certain standards of society, she just did not care what others thought of her.She hated it when someone told her she could not do something. Her mother told her she could not attend school like her brothers did. Her father told her she could not come on expeditions with him. This infuriated Pasang Lhamu, and rightly so.She wanted to break the shackles and ensure women from the Sherpa community and the country could dream big and by standing on the summit of Everest on April 22, 1993, she did exactly that.At a time when women were asked to stay home and look after their families, Pasang Lhamu Sherpa chose the extreme and decided to follow her dream. This came at a cost as she died during her descent, but her journey did not go in vain as she was able to inspire thousands of Nepali women.A recently screened documentary on her titled Pasang: In the Shadow of Everest tells exactly that. It tells the story of Pasang Lhamu Sherpa and her sheer will, courage, obsession, and why she wanted to climb Everest.The documentary takes us into the life of Pasang Lhamu Sherpa and shows us how hard it was for her, a woman, to go out and do something in a sport dominated by men.She felt that first-hand as the documentary shows how French alpinist Marc Batard in 1990 told her to head back down from the mountain as the expedition leader did not think she could reach the summit.It tells us how she was told by everyone that she should stay home and look after her children and not venture out into the mountains where she could lose her life.But Pasang Lhamu Sherpa did not listen to anyone as she persevered towards her goal – to become the first Nepali woman to climb Everest. Her bivouacking in the south summit in 1991 is proof of that as she proved how mentally strong she was.“Women from across the world have done wonders because they got the opportunities that we living in Nepal haven’t. I want to prove that we too can do the unthinkable,” she is heard saying in the film.And she is right. Before her, 16 women from all over the world had climbed Everest. While they climbed, no one from Nepal even dreamt of climbing it.The documentary on Pasang Lhamu Sherpa took nearly a decade to be made and relied on archived footage shot by news agencies in Nepal and foreigners. But the story it has told is simple yet powerful.The director, Nancy Svendsen, even tracked down Pemba Norbu who is the last person to see Pasang Lhamu alive.The film also shows how hard it was for her to fund the expedition on her own as Pasang Lhamu and her husband Sonam sold 60 per cent of their company to fund it.She tried to seek help from the government and even spoke to the prime minister, but even that was in vain as she had to pay permit fees to climb the mountain.The film shows how her eldest daughter, Dawa Futi Sherpa, is going back to find her mother and is trying to tell Pasang Lhamu Sherpa’s story to the world.It also shows how much her husband Sonam Sherpa, who she eloped with, supported her on her quest. In all four of her attempts, Soman was on Everest rallying her and ensuring things were in place for his wife to create history.On her trips to Europe with Sonam, Pasang Lhamu Sherpa saw how women ventured out into adventure activities, after which she climbed Mont Blanc. A wife of a Nepali climber accompanying him on his adventures in Europe is quite rare even today so Pasang Lhamu doing this in the 80s when the society was as conservative as ever, is something quite rare.Yet, there she was at Chamonix dreaming of climbing Mount Everest and becoming the first woman to do so.Svendsen travelled to Nepal and France to make this film and worked on it extensively with Pasang Lhamu Sherpa’s daughter Dawa Futi. She has done a tremendous job to show Pasang Lhamu’s courage and tenacity and how she dealt with problems at every turn in her life including from the society that questioned why a mother of three was risking her life to climb Everest.“Dawa learned so much about her mother and saw so many pictures and movies that she had never seen before because the family didn’t have them. This has been a process of healing for them,” Svendsen told the Golden Globe Awards in March 2022.Since it was released in 2022, the film has been officially selected for 20 film festivals and has won awards in 11 of them including Telluride in Colorado, Kendall Mountain in the UK and the BANFF in Canada.The accolades might keep on coming for this film that tells the story of Pasang Lhamu Sherpa and her heroism that in a country like Nepal is rarely recognised. She inspired a generation of Nepali women who went out and did what they wanted to do in life. Nepali women like Lhakpa Sherpa, Dawa Yangzum Sherpa, Pasang Lhamu Akita and 62 others have climbed Everest following Pasang Lhamu Sherpa. Many others, like her daughter Dawa Futi, have broken shackles to do what they have wanted to do in life. And many after this film, which pays homage to this great lady, will do the same.